
State Disaster Management Plan
June- 2019
Odisha State Disaster
Management Authority (OSDMA)

FOREWORD
Odisha due to its sub-tropical littoral location is vulnerable to various natural
hazards and with large number of industries, also at risk of various industrial accidents.
Past experiences have reinforced the learning that planning and preparedness are
pivotal to effective management of disasters. The State Disaster Management Plan
(SDMP) for the State of Odisha was prepared in the year 2013 and updated
subsequently in accordance with provisions of the Section 23 (1) and Section (5) of the
Disaster Management Act-2005 respectively. For 2019 the State Disaster Management
Plan has been restructured in accordance with the requirements of the Section 23 (4) of
the DM Act and National Disaster Management Guidelines on Preparation of State
Disaster Management Plans-2007.
The SDMP has been prepared with combined efforts of Odisha State Disaster
Management Authority (OSDMA) and the Special Relief Organisation (SRO), two
dedicated institutions working under the State Executive Committee (SEC), as a robust
document to provide framework and direction for all phases of disaster management
cycle and process for mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction into our developmental
agenda. The global perspectives on disaster management like the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction (SFDRR) and the Sustainable Development Goals 2015-30
have also taken into consideration for preparation of the plan. The SDMP reflects the
changes in our mindset and priorities towards disaster management in the State.
The institutional mechanism for disaster management in the State and other
Government and Non-Government stakeholders needs to work in a coordinated manner
for successful implementation of the plan.
 Sd/-
Chief Secretary and Chairman,
State Executive Committee

Executive Summary
There has been a paradigm shift in the concept of disaster management from response and
relief centric approach to a proactive and comprehensive mindset towards disaster
management covering all aspects from prevention, mitigation, preparedness to rehabilitation,
reconstruction and recovery.
As per Section 23 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 there shall be a plan for
disaster management for every state. The State Disaster Management Plan (SDMP)-2019 for
the State has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Disaster Management
Act- 2005 and the NDMA guidelines issued in the matter. The State Disaster Management
Plan (SDMP) is also in consistent with the priorities of action under Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction (SFDRR)- Understanding disaster risk; Strengthening disaster risk
governance to manage disaster risk; Investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience and
Enhancing disaster preparedness for effective response and to ‘Build Back Better’ in
recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction.
The State Disaster Management Plan (SDMP) provides a framework and direction
for all phases of disaster management cycle. The broad objective is to protect and minimize
the loss of lives and properties from disasters and to promote the culture of disaster risk
prevention and mitigation at all levels. The SDMP also provide clarity on roles and
responsibilities for all stakeholders concerned with disaster management in the state.
Odisha has a history of recurring natural disasters. The unique geo-climatic
conditions of Odisha make the state vulnerable to various natural disasters. The Odisha coast
is vulnerable to cyclone, associated storm surges and tsunami. The 11 major river systems of
the state cause flood in regular intervals. Besides, certain parts of the state are also
vulnerable to flash floods and landslides. The frequency, intensity and extent of droughts in
the state are gradually on the rise. Drought is particularly frequent and severe in the western
parts of the state. A portion of the state is prone to moderate earthquakes. In addition, the
State is also affected by disaster like severe heat wave, lightning, forest fire, road accidents.
Vulnerability to disasters of Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) origin
also exists. As the state is on rapid industrialisation drive, industrial disasters have emerged
as a formidable challenge.

As per provisions of the DM Act-2005, Odisha is having State Disaster Management
Authority (SDMA) at the state level and District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA)
at the district level. The State Executive Committee (SEC) has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary to coordinate all disaster management activities of the
state. The office of the Special Relief Commissioner and Odisha State Disaster Management
Authority (OSDMA), under the Revenue & Disaster Management Department, assist the
SEC in effective disaster management in the State.
In the face of increasing menace of various hazards, prevention and mitigation would
remain the key and the most effective strategy to reduce the risks of various hazards.
Structural mitigation measures generally refer to capital investment on physical
constructions or other development works, which include engineering measures and
construction of hazard resistant and protective structures and other protective infrastructure.
Non-structural mitigation measures refer to awareness and education, policies, techno legal
systems and practices, training, capacity development, public commitment, and methods and
operating practices, including participatory mechanisms, and the provision of information,
which can reduce risk with related impacts.
Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) into the developmental plans is an
important mandate of the Disaster Management Act 2005. Mainstreaming DRR involves
incorporating disaster risk reduction into developmental policy and practice. It means
radically expanding and enhancing disaster risk reduction so that it becomes normal
practice, fully institutionalized within an agency’s relief and development agenda.
Integration of disaster risk reduction measures into ongoing flagship programmes is being
used as an entry point for mainstreaming DRR in developmental plans.
Preparedness enabling activities like planning, awareness, education, exercises,
regular testing of warning systems and plans for evacuation backed with clear-cut
guidelines, allocation of responsibilities and budgetary provisions improves the response
mechanism to a disaster in terms of timely and effective rescue and relief operations. During
any disaster, communities are always the first responder. Community participation ensures
local ownership, addresses local needs and promotes volunteerism and mutual help to
prevent and minimize damage. Community based disaster preparedness is the key to
effective disaster management. Pre-positioning of human resources & materials is essential
for quick recovery thereby saving time, resources and minimizing severity of any

emergency. This again depends upon the organization, readiness & availability of manpower
& material, within and neighbouring areas, to face any impending disaster.
Response measures are those taken immediately after receiving early warning,
anticipating an impending disaster, or post-disaster in cases where an event occurs without
warning. The primary goal of response to a disaster is saving lives, protecting property,
environment, and meeting basic needs of human and other living beings after the disaster.
The State Emergency Operation Centre (SEOC) and Departments of the State Government
has Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for responding to any disaster situation.
Capacity development covers strengthening institutions, mechanism, and capacities
at all level of all stakeholders. Capacity building is an important component of investing in
disaster risk reduction. Training Need Assessment (TNA) has been conducted for assessing
current capacities of various departments and sectors which are directly affected by climate
change induced disaster risks. The personnel of Odisha Disaster Rapid Action Force
(ODRAF) are provided with 22 different types of basic and specialised training courses to
augment their capacities to deal with different disaster situations. Capacity building of Civil
Defence, task force members of MCS and MFS and other village volunteers is an integral
part of the capacity building programme under disaster management.
Partnership is inevitable for effective knowledge management & Odisha being a key
player in disaster management at national as well as international domain has a healthy
network of partners in varied field of disaster management.
Media plays an important role in the management of disaster in all stages. The main
objective of media management in disaster is to provide factual information to public with
respect to the latest development and to provide specific information to relatives/ dependants
on dead and injured persons.
Lesson learnt is a practice which needs to be documented indicating the processes
undertaken in carrying out certain activities successfully. This documentation will be a guide
in managing such activities in future & can be replicated in similar manner. The process
documentation of managing Sever Cyclonic Storm ‘Phailin’ in the year 2013 is the corner
stone in this direction.
As per the provisions of Disaster Management Act, 2005 and based on the recommendation
of the 13th Finance Commission, the Government of Odisha has constituted the State

Disaster Response Fund (SDRF). Disaster Management at the state level is mostly supported
by the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF). In the event of a calamity of a severe nature
when the State Disaster Response Fund is insufficient to meet the relief requirements,
additional central assistance is provided from NDRF, after following the laid down
procedure. Funds from other sources like State budget, Chief Minister’s Relief Fund,
External Assistance and loans from International Development Agencies like World Bank
etc. are also used for disaster management
As per provisions of the DM Act-2005 the State Executive Committee shall have the
responsibility for implementing the State Plan and act as the coordinating and monitoring
body for management of disaster in the State. As per section 23 (5) of the DM Act 2005 the
State Disaster management Plan (SDMP) shall be reviewed and updated annually.

Content
Sl.
No.
Chapter Page No.
1. Chapter I: Introduction 1-20
2. Chapter II: Vulnerability Assessment and
Risk Analysis
21-45
3. Chapter III: Preventive Measures 46-68
4. Chapter IV: Mainstreaming Disaster Chapter IV: Risk
Reduction (DRR) and Climate
Change Adaptations (CCA) in
Development Planning
69-84
5. Chapter V: Chapter V: Preparedness Measures 85-115
6. Chapter VI: Chapter VI: Response 116-166
7. Chapter VII: Chapter VII: Capacity Building 167-187
8 Chapter VIII: Chapter VIII: Knowledge Management 188-196
9 Chapter IX: Chapter IX: Financial Management 197-215
10 Chapter X: Chapter X: Implementation, Review and
Updating of the plan

Abbreviations and Acronyms
ADMO: Assistant District Medical Officer
AIDMI: All India Disaster Mitigation Institute
AMCDRR: Asian Ministerial Conference for Disaster Risk Reduction
ANM: Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
ARGs: Automatic Rain Gauges
ASHA: Accredited Social Health Activist
ATI: Administrative Training Institute
AWSs: Automated Weather Stations
BMTPC: Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council
CCA: Climate Change Adaptation
CBO: Community Based Organisation
CBDP: Community Based Disaster Preparedness
CBDM: Community Based Disaster Management
CDMO: Chief District Medical Officer
CMRF: Chief Minister’s Relief Fund
CSMMC: Cyclone Shelter Management and Maintenance Committee
CSO: Civil Society Organisation
CSS: Centrally Sponsored Schemes
CWC: Central Water Commission
DDMA: District Disaster Management Authority
DDMP: District Disaster Management Plan
DEOC: District Emergency Operation Centre
DLCNC: District Level Committee on Natural Calamities
DM: Disaster Management
DPC: District Planning Committee
DPMU: District Planning and Monitoring Unit
DRR: Disaster Risk Reduction
EWDS: Early Warning Dissemination System
FSMMC: Flood Shelter Maintenance and Management Committee
GIS: Geographical Information System
GOI: Government of India
GP: Gram Panchayat

GSDP: Gross State Domestic Product
HRVA: Hazard Risk and Vulnerability Analysis
HAM: Hertz Armstrong Marconi
HIV: Human Immunodeficiency Virus
IAG: Inter Agency Group
ICS: Incident Command System
IDRN: India Disaster Resource Network
IEC: Information, Education and Communication
IMD: India Meteorological Department (IMD)
IMR: Infant Mortality Rate
INCOIS: Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services
IRC: Indian Red Cross
IRS: Incident Response System
IRT: Incident Response Team
MAH: Major Accident Hazard
MCS: Multi Purpose Cyclone Shelters
MFS: Multi Purpose Flood Shelters
MGNREGS: Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
MHA: Ministry of Home Affairs
NCC: National Cadet Corps
NDMA: National Disaster Management Authority
NDRF: National Disaster Response Force
NDRF: National Disaster Response Fund
NEC: National Executive Committee
NGO: Non Government Organisation
NHM: National Health Mission
NIDM: National Institute of Disaster Management
NITI: National Institution for Transforming India
NRDWP: National Rural Drinking Water Programme
NSA: Net Sown Area
NSS: National Service Scheme
ORC: Odisha Relief Code
ODRAF: Odisha Disaster Rapid Action Force
ORSAC: Odisha Space Application Centre
OSDMA: Odisha State Disaster Management Authority

PHC: Primary Health Centre
PHDMA: Poverty and Human Development Monitoring Agency
PMAY: Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana
PMGSY: Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojna
PRIs: Panchayati Raj Institutions
RKVY: Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
SCG: State Crisis Group
SDG: Sustainable Development Goals
SDMA: State Disaster Management Authority
SDMC: State Drought Monitoring Cell
SDMP: State Disaster Management Plan
SDRF: State Disaster Response Fund
SEC: State Executive Committee
SEOC: State Emergency Operation Centre
SFC: State Flood Cell
SFDRR: Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
SLSC: State Level Sanctioning Committee
SLCNC: State Level Committee on Natural Calamities
SOP: Standard Operating Procedure
SRC: Special Relief Commissioner
SSA: Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan
TNA: Training Need Assessment
ULBs: Urban Local Bodies
UNDP: United Nations Development Programme
UNISDR: United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
VDMC: Village Disaster Management Committee
VDMP: Village Disaster Management Plan
VHF: Very High Frequency
YRC: Youth Red Cross

Chapter I
Introduction
Odisha, due to its sub-tropical littoral location is vulnerable to various natural
disasters like tropical cyclones, floods, storm surges, lightning, tsunami and whirlwinds
etc. Changing climatic conditions is likely to increase intensity and frequency of natural
disasters. Growing economy and industrial development have started giving indications
of potential chemical and industrial disasters. Population growths leading to
intensification of human settlements in vulnerable areas with increasing urban population
pose challenges to disaster management mechanism of the state. The State Disaster
Management Plan (SDMP) is the plan for disaster management for the entire State
prepared under the Section 23 of Disaster Management Act, 2005. It provides a
framework and direction for all phases of disaster management cycle. It covers disaster
risk reduction, mitigation, preparedness, response, recovery and better reconstruction.
Section 23 of the Disaster Management Act 2005, provides that there shall be a
plan for disaster management for every state. It outlines the broad coverage of the plan as
well as the requirements of consultation in the preparation of the state plan. It also
provides for annual review and updating of the state plan, and enjoins upon the state
governments to make provisions for financing the activities to be carried out under the
state plan. It provides for the departments of the state governments to draw up their own
plans in accordance with the state plan. All provisions of the DM Act 2005 for
preparation of the State Plan have been incorporated in the State Disaster Management
Plan -2019 for the state of Odisha. The details of the provisions of the act and
corresponding chapters of SDMP- 2019 are as follows
i. Section 23 (4) (a) the State Plan shall include the
vulnerability of different parts of the State to different
forms of disasters;
- Chapter- II
(Vulnerability
Assessment and Risk
Analysis)
ii. Section 23 (4) (b) the State Plan shall include the
measures to be adopted for prevention and mitigation of
disasters;
- Chapter- III
(Preventive Measures)

iii. Section 23 (4) (c) the State Plan shall include the manner
in which the mitigation measures shall be integrated with
the development plans and projects;
- Chapter- IV
(Mainstreaming DRR and
CCA in Development
Planning)
iv. Section 23 (4) (d) the State Plan shall include the
capacity-building and preparedness measures to be
taken;
- Chapter-V
(Preparedness ) &
VII (Capacity Building)
v. Section 23 (4) (e) the State Plan shall include the roles
and responsibilities of each Department of the
Government of the State in relation to the measures
specified in clauses (b), (c) and (d) above;
- Chapter- III, IV,
V & VII
vi. Section 23 (4) (f) the State Plan shall include the roles
and responsibilities of different Departments of the State
in responding to any threatening disaster situation or
disaster;
- Chapter- VI
(Response)
1.1 Vision:
“To build a safer and disaster resilient state and significantly reduce the loss of life and
number of people affected, economic losses and damage to critical infrastructure due to
disasters, through a culture of prevention , mitigation and preparedness and building the
capacity at all levels to effectively respond to disasters and to build back better.”
1.2 Theme:
The SDMP has been prepared taking into active consideration of the following themesa. Paradigm shift in concept of disaster management from response and relief centric
approach to a proactive and comprehensive mindset towards disaster management
covering all aspects from prevention, mitigation, preparedness to rehabilitation,
reconstruction and recovery.
b. During any disaster, communities are always the first responder. Community
participation ensures local ownership, addresses local needs and promotes
volunteerism and mutual help to prevent and minimize damage. Community based
disaster preparedness is the key to effective disaster management.
c. Priorities for action under Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-
2030- 1.Understanding disaster risk; 2.Strengthening disaster risk governance to
manage disaster risk; 3. Investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience and

4.Enhancing disaster preparedness for effective response and to ‘Build Back
Better’ in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction.
d. Sustainable Development plays an important role in reducing the risk loss and
damage.
e. Ensuring efficient response and relief with a caring approach towards the needs of
the vulnerable sections of the society.
1.3 Objectives:
The broad objectives of the SDMP arei. To protect and minimize the loss of lives and properties/infrastructure from
disasters.
ii. To minimize the suffering of people due to disasters.
iii. To minimize the disaster risk and vulnerability of people and infrastructure in the
State.
iv. Promote the culture of disaster risk prevention and mitigation at all levels.
v. To enhance disaster preparedness for effective response.
vi. Empower both local authorities and communities as partners to reduce and
manage disaster risks.
vii. To build the capacity of all stakeholders in the state to effectively respond to
disasters and promote community- based disaster management.
viii. Facilitate the mainstreaming of disaster management concerns into the
developmental planning and process.
ix. Develop efficient disaster response/relief mechanism in the state.
x. To provide clarity on roles and responsibilities for all stakeholders concerned with
disaster management.
xi. To ensure co-ordination and promoting productive partnership with all other
agencies related to disaster management.
xii. Promote “Build Back Better” in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction.

1.4 Stakeholders of the State DM Plan:
The State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA), Revenue & Disaster
Management Department, Odisha State Disaster Management Authority (OSDMA) and
the Office of the Special Relief Commissioner are the major institutions in the State that
deals with all phases of disaster management. All the major line departments of the State
Government, the District Administration, UN Agencies, other technical institutions,
Panchayati Raj Institutions, Urban Local Bodies, Community at large and NGOs etc. are
the stakeholders of the State Disaster Management Plan (SDMP). The role of the
stakeholders is portrayed with the objective of making the concerned organizations
understand their duties and responsibilities regarding disaster management at all levels,
and accomplishing them.
Roles and Responsibilities:
State Government:
 Ensure that all the principal authorities and role players shall take necessary steps
to mitigate and manage disasters.
 Make sure that the State Administration and Local Authorities shall take into
consideration the guidelines laid down by the Authority while planning its
activities.
 Facilitate procurement related to disaster management materials, equipment and
services in connection with the disaster management and ensuring their quality.
 Issue a direction for the purpose of avoiding an imminent damage arising out of a
disaster or mitigation of its effects.
 Suspend operation of any executive order if such executive order prevents, hinders
or delays any necessary action in coping with disaster.
Departments of the State Government:
 Provide assistance to the OSDMA, Special Relief Commissioner, Collectors and
local authorities in disaster management activities.
 Carry out relief, reconstruction and rehabilitation activities under the supervision
of the SRC and the Collector at the State level and at the district level
respectively.
 Co-ordinate preparation and the implementation of plan with other departments,
local authorities, communities and stakeholders.
Odisha State Disaster Management Authority (OSDMA):
 Promote an integrated and coordinated system of disaster management including
prevention and mitigation of disaster by the State, local authorities, stakeholders
and communities.

 Collect data on all aspects of disasters and disaster management and analyze it and
further conduct researches and studies relating to the potential effects of events
that may result in disasters.
 Act as a repository of information concerning disasters and disaster management.
 Prepare and update the policies and plans for disaster management in the State.
 Promote or cause to be promoted awareness and preparedness, advice and train
the community and stakeholders with a view to increasing capacity of the
community and stakeholders to deal with potential disasters.
 Coordinate and monitor activities relating to prevention and mitigation of
disasters, including capacity-building.
 Monitor the progress of the preparation and updating of disaster management
plans and coordinate the implementation of such plans.
Office of the Special Relief Commissioner (SRC):
 Facilitate Relief, Restoration and Rehabilitation in the event of disaster.
 Coordinate an effective emergency response and relief on the occurrence of a
disaster.
 Review and monitor emergency response plans and guidelines and ensure that the
district level DM plans are prepared, revised and updated.
 Develop an appropriate relief implementation strategy for the State taking into
account the unique circumstances of each district and deficiency in institutional
capacity and resources of the State.
 Provide directions to the Collectors and the local authorities having jurisdiction
over the affected area to provide emergency relief in accordance with disaster
management plans to minimize the effects of disaster.
The District Administration:
 Facilitate and coordinate with district level line Departments, PRIs to ensure pre
and post - disaster management activities in the district.
 Assist community training, awareness programmes and the installation of
emergency facilities with the support of PRIs, non-governmental organizations,
and the private sector.
 Take appropriate actions to smoothen the response and relief activities to
minimize the effect of disaster.
 Take post disaster rehabilitation and reconstruction activities.
 Coordination of activities of different stakeholders of disaster management at
district level including the NGOs.
 Coordinate relief assistance provided by different organizations for equitable
distribution of relief materials among the affected people.
Panchayati Raj Institutions and Urban Local Bodies:
 Provide assistance to District Administration, Office of the Special Relief
Commissioner and OSDMA in disaster management activities.
 Facilitate capacity building of people’s representative and community members.
 Awareness generation regarding disaster preparedness.

 Ensure prepositioning of relief material at strategic locations.
Private Sector:
 The private sector should ensure their active participation in the pre-disaster
activities in alignment with the overall plan developed by the OSDMA and
District Administration.
 They should also adhere to the regulation and other specifications, as may be
stipulated by relevant local authorities.
 Provide support and assist in response activities.
Community Groups and Voluntary agencies:
 Local community groups and voluntary agencies including NGOs should actively
assist in prevention and mitigation activities under the overall direction and
supervision of the OSDMA and District Administration.
 They should actively participate in all training activities as may be organized and
should familiarize themselves with their role in disaster management.
Citizen:
 It is a duty of every citizen to assist the District Administration or such other
person entrusted with or engaged in disaster management whenever his aid is
demanded generally for the purpose of disaster management.
-

1.5 State Profile:
Odisha extends from 17°49’ to 22° 34’ North Latitude and from 81° 27’ to 87° 29’ East
Longitude. It is surrounded by West Bengal in the north-east, Bihar and Jharkhand in the
north, Andhra Pradesh in the south-east, Chhattisgarh in the west and Bay of Bengal in
the east. It has a coastline of about 480 km and its total area is 1,55,707 square km.
covering about 4.87 % of the total area of the Country.
The State is broadly divided into four geographical regions viz. the Northern
Plateau, Central River Basins, Eastern Hills and Coastal Plains. The areas of the state
north of latitude 20oN have elevation up to 500m above sea level, in general and in the
south western districts, they rise to 1500-1600m above sea level. The eastern hill are
elevated and are generally 900 m above sea level.
Climate:
The State has a tropical climate, characterised by high temperature, high humidity,
medium to high rainfall and short mild winters. The year may be divided into four
seasons. The winter season from December to February is followed by the pre-monsoon
or hot weather season from March to May. The period from June to September
constitutes the southwest monsoon season and the period of October and November is the
post-monsoon season. During the period from December to February, generally low
temperatures prevail over the state except in the coastal belt. In the hot weather season
from March to May, weather is generally dry and uncomfortable in the interior, while due
to lower temperatures, the plateau regions are comparatively less uncomfortable.The
normal rainfall of the State is 1,451.2 mm. The actual rainfall received, vary from district
to district. About 75 percent to 80 percent of rainfall is received during the period from
June to September. Even though the quantum of rain fall is quite high, its distribution
during the monsoon period is highly uneven and erratic. As a result, flood and drought
visit regularly with varying intensity. By mid-October, the south-west monsoon generally
withdraws from Odisha.
The State can be divided into ten agro-climatic zones on the basis of soil, weather
and other relevant characteristics. Its land can be classified into three categories, low
(25.6%), medium (33.6%) and up-lands (40.8%) with various types of soils like red,
yellow, red-loamy, alluvial, coastal alluvial, laterite and black soil, etc. with low and

medium texture. Characteristics of different agro-climatic zones in Odisha are presented
in following table.
Agro-climatic Zones in Odisha:
Table:1.1
Sl.
No
.
Agroclimatic
Zone
Agricultural Districts Climate Normal
Mean
annual
rainfall
(mm)
Broad Soil groups
1 North
Western
Plateau
Sundargarh, parts of
Deogarh, Sambalpur &
Jharsuguda
Hot & moist
sub-humid
1600 Red, Brown forest,
Red & Yellow,
Mixed Red & Black
2 North
Central
Plateau
Mayurbhanj, major
parts of Keonjhar,
(except Anandapur &
Ghasipura block)
Hot & moist
sub-humid
1534 Lateritic, Red &
Yellow, Mixed Red
& Black
3 North
Eastern
Coastal Plain
Balasore, Bhadrak,
parts of Jajpur &
hatdihi block of
Keonjhar
Moist subhumid1568 Red, Lateritic,
Deltalc alluvial,
Coastal alluvial &
Saline
4 East & South
Eastern
Coastal Plain
Kendrapara, Khurda,
Jagatsinghpur, part of
Cuttack, Puri,
Nayagarh & part of
Ganjam
Hot & Humid 1577 Saline, Lateritic,
Alluvial, Red &
Mixed red & Black
5 North
Eastern Ghat
Phulbani, Rayagada,
Gajapati, part of
Ganjam & small
patches of Koraput
Hot & moist,
sub-humid
1597 Brown forest,
Lateritic Alluvial,
Red, Mixed Red &
Black
6 Eastern Ghat
High Land
Major parts of
Koraput, Nabarangpur
Warm & humid 1522 Red, Mixed Red &
Black, Mixed Red
& Yellow
7 South
Eastern Ghat
Malkangiri & part of
Keonjhar
Warm & humid 1710 Red, Lateritic,
Black
8 Western
Undulating
Zone
Kalahandi & Nuapada Hot & moist
sub-humid
1352 Red, Mixed Red &
Black and Black
9 Western
Central Table
Land
Bargarh, Bolangir,
Boudh, Sonepur, parts
of Sambalpur &
Jharsuguda
Hot & moist
sub-humid
1614 Red & Yellow, Red
& Black, Black,
Brown forest,
Lateritic
10 Mid Central
Table Land
Angul, Dhenkanal,
parts of Cuttack &
Jajpur
Hot & moist
sub-humid
1421 Alluvial, Red,
Lateritic, Mixed
Red & Black
(Source: Statistical Abstract of Odisha-2012)

River and the Drainage System:
All the rivers of Odisha are primarily peninsular rivers and have originated from (a) the
Chotanagpur plateau in Jharkhand, (b) the Amarkantak plateau in Chattisgarh, or (c) the
Eastern Ghats within Odisha. All these rivers are non-perennial in character.
The main rivers in the state include: Figure:1.1
 Rivers originating from Chotanagpur plateau: These include Subarnarekha and
Brahmani. While Subarnarekha’s stretch within Odisha is small, Brahmani and its
tributaries form an important drainage sub-system in Odisha.
 Rivers from the Amarkantak plateau: The Mahanadi and its tributaries (25 on the
right bank and 2 on the left bank, more important among which are the Tel, the Jira
and the Jhaun) form the largest drainage sub-system on the central eastern coast of
India. The Mahanadi is divided into a series of distributaries and sub-distributaries.
 Rivers originating in the Mahanadi delta: There are seven such rivers (the Samolia,
the Gobari, the Prachi, the Kadua, the Dhanua, the Ratnachira and the Nuna).
 Rivers from Keonjhar: The Baitrani, which has a total length of 344 km, with the
tributaries, such as the Deo and the Indrani, forms a major drainage sub-system in
Odisha. A peculiar feature of Baitarani is that in its lower reaches, it drains into the
distributaries of the Brahmani, and has a common mouth to the Bay of Bengal at
Dhamra.
 Rivers from the eastern slopes of the Eastern Ghats: These rivers include the
Budhabalanga, the Salandi, the Rushikulya and several other smaller streams.

Tidal Sections of the Rivers: The tidal sections of rives and their distributaries are
confined to the lower reaches of the rivers in the coastal plain. The tidal sections vary as
per the shape of the river mouth, depth of the channel, and extension of the sand bars in
the river mouths. The tidal channels vary from a maximum of 90 km in the case of
Brahmani to a minimum of 5 km in the case of Baghuni from their respective mouths.
The Mahanadi is tidal for about 35 km, whereas the Devi, a distributary of the Mahanadi
is tidal for 45 km.
Coastline:
The Odisha coast which is 480 km long and 10 – 100 km wide forms a part of east
coast of India, The coastal territory is drained by a number of rivers like Mahanadi,
Brahmani, Baitarani, Devi, Budhabalanga, Subarnarekha Rushikulya and some other
smaller ones. These rivers carry a large volume of sediments which have formed the
above huge single delta. Hence the Odisha coast is under uninterrupted influence of
freshwater flow and delta building processes. The coastline is in general oblique to the
global wind system which generates strong littoral currents and represents one of the
world’s largest littoral drift areas. In the northern Odisha coast i.e. north of Dhamra coast,
the tidal range increases and wave energy diminishes resulting in formation of mudflats.
The brackish water coastal lagoon i.e. Chilika lagoon has been formed because of
formation and growth of barrier spit from Paluru. The other important features of Odisha
coast are mangroves, estuaries and other related sedimentary as well as sandy
environments like sand dunes.
Forest and Environment:
Odisha is well endowed with forests and rich bio- diversity. It has 37.34 percent
land under forest cover. Out of the sixteen major forest type groups in India, four forest
types that exist in Odisha are: Tropical Dry Deciduous Forests (57.87 percent), Tropical
Moist Deciduous Forests (39.88 percent), Tropical Semi Evergreen Forests (0.68 percent)
and Littoral & Swam Forests (0.48 percent). Its natural endowments include Similipal
National Park, Chilika Lake, Bhitarkanika Wild Life Sanctuary and mangrove forests.
The mangrove cover in Odisha has increased to 231 sq kms in 2015, a rise by 8.45
percent over 2013. Odisha accounts for 11 percent of nation’s water resource and is rich
in several minerals including iron ore, bauxite, chromite, manganese and coal.

Demographic details:
As per 2011 census, Odisha has 96, 61,085 number of households which is 3.9
percentage of the total number of households of India. The total population of the state is
4,19,74,218 (male-2,12,12,136 female-2,07,62,082), out of which 3,49,70,562 (83 %)
lives in rural areas. The share of ST and SC population to total state population is 22.8
percent and 17.1 percent respectively. The decadal growth rate (2001-2011) of
population is 14.0 and the density of population per sq km is 270. Odisha has a sex ratio
(females per 1000 males) of 979. The child sex ratio (0-6 years) is 941.
Odisha attained the literacy rate of 72.87 percent at par with the national average
72.99 percent in 2011 census registering a decadal increase of 9.8 percent between 2001
and 2011. The State’s male literacy rate of 81.59 percent was marginally higher and
female literacy rate of 64 percent was also at par with national averages by 2011. The SC
and ST communities had relatively lower literacy rate of 69.02 and 52.24 percent in
2011.
According to Census 2011 the total workers of the state is 1,75,41,589 of which
61 percent are main workers and 39 percent are marginal workers. Although main
workers in Odisha rose by 3.2 percent between 2001 & 2011, its share to total workers
fell sharply from 67.2 percent to 61 percent during the same period. The prime concern is
in the increase in under- employment in the State due to the rise in the percentage of
marginal workers to total workers from 32.80 percent in 2001 to 38.96 percent in 2011.
While the share of Agriculture sector in the State GSDP has come down to a level of
around 18 percent, still the sector accounts for 62 percent of the total workforce as per
2011 Census. The work participation rate (2011) of Odisha is 41.8, in rural areas it is
43.2 while in urban areas it is 34.8
Administrative divisions:
Odisha is divided into 30 districts for administrative convenience. These are again
regrouped into 3 revenue divisions (Central, Southern and Northern).
 Central Division comprises of Cuttack, Jagatsinghpur, Kendrapada, Jajpur,
Balasore, Bhadrak, Puri, Khordha, Nayagarh, and Mayurbhanj districts.

 Southern Division includes Ganjam, Gajapati, Koraput, Nabarangpur, Rayagada,
Malkangiri, Kalahandi, Nuapada, Kandhamal, and Boudh districts.
 Northern Division covers Sambalpur, Deogarh, Jharsuguda, Bargarh, Bolangir,
Sonepur, Sundargrh, Dhenkanal, Angul, and Keonjhar districts.
Odisha has 58 sub-divisions, 317 tahasils and 314 blocks. These 314 blocks comprise of
6,801 Gram Panchayats & 51,349 villages. There are 5 Municipal Corporations,
47 Municipalities, 62 Notified Area Councils. There are 617 numbers of Police Stations
and 318 No. of Fire Stations. The State is divided into 21 no. of Lok Sabha
Constituencies and 147 no. of Assembly Constituencies.
Figure:1.2
Economy:
The economy has been witnessing structural transformation from an agriculture-based
economy to services and industries driven economy. The share of the broad agriculture
sector which was around 55 percent of GSDP in 1950-51 has come down to a level of
19.91 percent by 2016-17, while the combined share of Industries and Services sectors
has rose from 45 percent to 80.09 percent during the same period. By 2016-17, the

Mining, Manufacturing, Trade, Transport and Real Estate sub sectors, in particular, have
become the major drivers of Odisha’s economy.
Socio – Economic profile:
Land holding pattern is a prime determinant of the production structure and socioeconomic conditions in a society. Operational land holdings in Odisha are classified as
marginal, small, semi-medium, medium and large land holdings depending upon the area
controlled in a single land holding. Distribution of operational holdings indicates that the
total number of operational holdings has been increasing over the years but the area
under holdings has been declining except for Scheduled Castes. As per 2000-01
agriculture census, the area of operational holdings of all social groups was 50.81 lakh
hectares, which has declined to 50.19 lakh hectares in 2005-06 census and finally to
48.52 lakh hectares in 2010-11 census. The corresponding figures for scheduled caste
stood at 5.14 lakh hectares, 5.26 lakh hectares, and 5.65 lakh hectares respectively for
2000-01, 2005-06 & 2010-11, while for scheduled tribes the figures were 16.31, 17.48
and 16.15 lakh hectares respectively. Land use in Odisha gives a contrasting picture in
current decade. Between 2004-05 & 2011-12, the net sown area (NSA) depleted from
57.39 lakh hectares to 52.92 lakh hectares. But NSA increased from 52.92 lakh hectares
to 56.08 lakh hectares between 2011-12 & 2015-16. In contrast, the area sown more than
once (ASMO) was increasing consistently since 2004-05.
Nearly 83 percentage of Odisha’s population live in the rural areas and depend
mostly on agriculture as their livelihood. One of the major concerns of the State has
been to accelerate the all round development of scheduled tribes and scheduled castes.
For historical reasons, this segment of the society has remained socially and
economically backward. Therefore, concerted efforts have been made under different
Plans to bring them into the mainstream of development. The state Government is
committed to the development of these communities. Accordingly, various special
programmes and welfare measures have been launched for their benefit, which include
legal aid, rehabilitation of marginalized STs and SCs, housing facilities, establishment of
special employment exchanges, reservation in employment, etc.
(Source: Odisha Economic Survey-2016-17)
Millennium Development Goals and Odisha:
As per “Odisha State Report on Millennium Development Goals” published in 2016 by
Poverty and Human Development Monitoring Agency (PHDMA), Planning and

Convergence Department, Government of Odisha the progress of the state with respect to
different development indicators are as follows.
Goal 1: Eradicate Extreme Poverty and Hunger:
During the past few decades Odisha have made considerable progress in economic and
development indicators. The Poverty Head Count Ratio (PHCR) of Odisha has declined
significantly during 1990-2012, from 59.6 in 1990 it has come down to 32.6 in 2012. The
Poverty Gap Ratio (PGR) has also recorded a sharp decline in both rural and urban areas
of the State. In rural Odisha it has come down from17.37 in 2004-05 to 7.01 in 2011-12
and in Urban Odisha it has come down from 9.60 in 2004-05 to 5.05 in 2011-12.
Similarly the proportion of underweight children below three years of age has gradually
declined. From 54.1 in 1990 it has come down to 34.4 in 2013-14. The share of poorest
quintile in terms of monthly per capita consumption expenditure in rural areas is higher as
compared to urban areas in Odisha. Their share of consumption is slightly higher in both
rural and urban areas of Odisha as compared to the national average.
Goal-2: Achieve Universal Primary Education:
The Net Enrolment Ratio (NER) in primary education in Odisha has increased by about
9.0 percent from 2006-07 (82.06) to 2014-15 (91.01). The NER is the highest in
Mayurbhanj district (97.08) and the lowest in Khurdha district (85.46). About half the
districts (14) have NER higher than the state average (91.01 percent). The retention rate
in primary education has also improved gradually from 70.44 in 2007 to 86.12 in 2014-
15. However, in almost half of districts (14), it is significantly lower than the state
average (86.12). The literacy rate of 15-24 year olds, or the youth literacy rate, has
increased from 75.4 percent in 2001 to 86.0 percent in 2011. The youth literacy rate in
both rural and urban areas in Odisha has increased and the rural- urban gap has declined
from 16.0 percent in 2001 to 8.1 percent in 2011. While the male youth literacy rate is
considerably higher than female youth literacy, there has been a significant reduction of
the gender gap in youth literacy rate.
Goal- 3 Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women:
Freedom from any type of discrimination and disparity is a key human right. The State
Government is aware of this and is promoting gender equality in education, health,

nutrition and governance through support for reproductive and sexual health and rights
and empowerment of women.
In 2014-15, the Gender Parity Index (GPI) in primary education was recorded at 0.93,
which is unfavourable to girls. It came down marginally from 0.94 in 2011 to 0.93 in
2014-15. There is significant inter- district variation with the GPI being the highest in
Boudh (0.99) and the lowest in Nayagarh (0.85). There has been noteworthy
improvement in the GPI in secondary education. During 2014-15, the gender parity index
was recorded at 0.98, which means it is favourable to girls and that the number of girls
dropping out of school has gone down.
Odisha has witnessed major advances in improving women’s literacy and access to all
level of education. As per Census 2011, the ratio of literate young women to young men
(15-24 years Age Group) was recorded 0.89 in Odisha, indicating a gradual increase from
0.78 in 2001. The ratio of literate women to men among youth is the highest in
Jagatsinghpur district (0.89) and the lowest in Koraput (0.63).
The share of women in wage employment in non- agricultural sector indicates the degree
to which women have equal access to be paid for employment in industry and service
sectors. The share of women in wage employment in non- agricultural sector in Odisha
has declined from 21.0 in 2004-05 to 18.4 in 2011 12. The low shares of women in this
sector is a concern and reflects their restricted participation in non- agriculture wage
employment.
Proportion of seats held by Women in National Parliament/ State Assembly is linked to
women’s empowerment. In the State Assembly out of 147 members, only eleven women
(7.48 percent) were elected in 2014. Through there has been an improvement between
1990 and 2014, the percentage of women representatives in the State Assembly is still
quite low. The proportion of seats held by women in the National Parliament from Odisha
has remained alarmingly low and far below the desired level of equal participation.
Women are better represented at the bottom level of political decision-making in the state.
As per 2012 data, out of 854 seats, more than half of Zilla Parisad seats had women
members. The percentage of women members increased from 35.2 in 2007 to 50.09 in
2012.

Goal-4 Reduce Child Mortality:
Child health in general and childhood mortality in particular are commonly used as the
basic indicators of social and human development. The Under –Five Mortality Rate
(U5MR) in Odisha has declined from 136 in 1990 to 66 in 2013. As per the Sample
Registration System 2014, the IMR has decreased in Odisha from 112 in 1990 to 49 in
2014. However, it is still higher that the national average.
As per SRS, the infant mortality rate is higher in rural areas as compared to urban areas
during 1990 to 2014. However, the gap has reduced over a period of time. From gender
perspectives, the female infant mortality rate is 51 against the male infant mortality rate
of 48 in the State. The proportion of one- year old children immunized against measles
was 75.5 percent in 2013-14. During the period of 2002-2014, the proportion of children
immunized against measles increased in rural areas by 7 percentage points while in urban
areas it went up by 7.7 percentages.
Goal- 5 Improve Maternal Health:
The Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) during 1990- 2013 has declined about 53.9 percent
in Odisha. From 482 in 1990 the MMR has come down 222 in 2013. However it is still
much higher than what was targeted.
There has been improvement in the attendance of skilled health personnel in delivery, and
percentage of safe delivery in Odisha. Nearly 83.7 percent women reported birth
attended by skilled health professionals during 2013-14 in Odisha.
Goal-6 Combat HIV/ AIDS, Malaria and Other Diseases:
The prevalence of HIV among various population groups has declined in Odisha,
including pregnant women aged 15-24 years, in the period 2010 to 2015. The highest
prevalence of HIV is in Ganjam (0.20) and the lowest in Bhadrak (0.02). More that 90
percent of currently married women aged 15-49 year are aware of HIV/ AIDS and the
knowledge increased significantly by 32.2 percentage points during 2002-04 and 2012-
13.

Goal-7 Ensure Environmental Sustainability:
Increasing forest cover is a measure towards ensuring sustainable environment and biodiversity. Odisha is rich in forest cover and has recorded forest land area of about 58,136
sq. kms., which is more than one- third (37.3 percent) of the total geographical area. The
State’s forest area is composed of 26,329 sq. kms reserve forests, 11,686 sq kms of
demarcated forests, 3,839 sq kms of un- demarcated protected forests and 16,282 sq kms
of unclassified forests in 2015.
To maintain bio-diversity, the state has tow national parks, 19 wildlife sanctuaries, two
tiger reserves, one proposed tiger reserve and one biosphere reserve. The total area
covered by national parks and sanctuaries (protected area) is 8,351.31 sq. km. which
constitute 5.36 percent of geographical area and 10.37 percent of forest area in the state.
The solid fuels lead to indoor air pollution and the high percentage of households using
solid fuels for cooking results in major health problems. As per Census 2011, about 86.2
percent households in rural area and 45.2 percent in urban areas were using solid fuels for
cooking. There was an increase of 5.37 percentage points using solid fuels for cooking
between 2001 and 2011.
Improved drinking water source is a proxy for measuring access to safe drinking water. It
includes tap water, hand pump and tube well. According to Census 2011, more than
three-fourths of households had access to safe drinking water in Odisha, which includes
hand pump (41.4 percentage), tube well (20.0 percentage), tap water from treated source
(10.0 percentage) and tap water from untreated source (3.9 percentage). Odisha has
progressed in access to safe drinking water from 39.2 percent in 1991 to 75.2 percent in
2011, which means an increase of 36.1 percentage points.
According to Census 2011, more than three-fourths (76.6 percent) of Odisha’s population
has no toilet/ latrine facility in their households and practice open defecation. Overall,
only 18.2 percent of households have access to improved sanitation facilities within their
houses. The disparity between rural and urban areas is stark. In rural Odisha, only 10.6
percent households have improved sanitation facilities within their premises while 59.6
percent households in urban Odisha have such facilities.
According to Census 2011, only 16.7 percent of the State’s population resides in urban
areas. Boudh with 4.6 percent has the lowest percent urban population while Khurdha is

the most urbanized district at 48.1 percent. There was a significant increase in the slum
population from 6.4 lakh in 2001 to 15.6 lakh in 2011 in the state, which is about 9.2 lakh
increase in the slum population. More than one-fifth of the urban population lives in
slums in Odisha and there was a substantial increase in the slum population to urban
population between 2001 and 2011 by about 6.6 percent.
Goal-8 Develop A Global Partnership for Development:
New technologies, especially information and communication have brought about
amazing changes and played an important role in modernization and rapid economic
growth. The overall tele-density in the state on March 2015 was 66.85 per 100
population. In urban areas the density was 172.11 per 100 population and 44.46 in rural
areas. As per Census 2011, 38.0 percent of households in Odisha had mobile phones and
4.2 percent had telephone lines.
Odisha has witnessed tremendous improvement in internet subscribers. There were 17.30
internet subscribers per 100 population in March 2015 in the State. It is lower than the
national average (24.09 per 100 population). There is a significant rural and urban
difference. Urban areas had 51.03 internet subscribers per 100 population, while rural
areas were limited to 10.13 per 100 population. In Odisha, only 1.4 percent of households
had internet as per 2011 Census.
1.6 Disaster and Sustainable Development
Disasters are intertwined with development in three-dimensional nexus. First, disasters
eat away hard earned gains of development of years and decades. Second, lack of
development exposes vulnerable communities to the risks of disasters. Third and
ironically in an opposite direction, development creates new risk of disasters, such as
houses and infrastructure without compliance of zoning and building regulations are
vulnerable; mining and industries in ecologically sensitive zones may destroy the natural
buffer to disasters, while fossil fuel based production and consumption enhance risks of
climate related disasters.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development adopted by the UN General Assembly in
September 2015 embedded disaster risk management in Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) with specific targets of building disaster resilience across different sectors of
development.

Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere
1.5 By 2030 build the resilience of the poor and those in vulnerable situations, and reduce
their exposure and vulnerability to climate-related extreme events and other economic,
social and environmental shocks and disasters
Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote
sustainable agriculture
2.4 By 2030 ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient
agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain
ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather,
drought, flooding and other disasters, and that progressively improve land and soil quality
Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages
3. d. Strengthen the capacity of all countries, particularly developing countries, for early
warning, risk reduction, and management of national and global health risks
Goal 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote life-long
learning opportunities for all
4.a Build and upgrade education facilities that are child, disability and gender sensitive
and provide safe, non-violent, inclusive and effective learning environments for all
Goal 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for
all
6.6 By 2020 protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including mountains, forests,
wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes
Goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable
industrialization and foster innovation
9.1 Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including regional
and trans-border infrastructure, to support economic development and human well-being,
with a focus on affordable and equitable access for all
Goal 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
11.4 Strengthen efforts to protect and safeguard the world’s cultural and natural heritage
11.5 By 2030 significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of affected
people and substantially decrease the economic losses relative to GDP caused by
disasters, including water-related disasters, with the focus on protecting the poor and
people in vulnerable situations
11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by
paying special attention to air quality, municipal and other waste management

11.b By 2020, substantially increase the number of cities and human settlements adopting
and implementing integrated policies and plans towards inclusion, resource efficiency,
mitigation and adaptation to climate change, resilience to disasters, develop and
implement in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-30,
holistic disaster risk management at all levels
11.c Support least developed countries, including through financial and technical
assistance, for sustainable and resilient buildings utilizing local materials
Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts
13.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate related hazards and natural
disasters in all countries
13.2 Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies, and planning
13.3 Improve education, awareness raising and human and institutional capacity on
climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction, and early warning
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development
14.2 By 2020, sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid
significant adverse impacts, including by strengthening their resilience, and take action
for their restoration, to achieve healthy and productive oceans
Goal 15: Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems,
sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land
degradation and halt biodiversity loss
15.1 By 2020 ensure conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and inland
freshwater ecosystems and their services, in particular forests, wetlands, mountains and
dry lands, in line with obligations under international agreements
15.3 By 2020, combat desertification, and restore degraded land and soil, including land
affected by desertification, drought and floods, and strive to achieve a land-degradation
neutral world
The disaster specific targets of Sustainable Development Goals 2030 and the short
and long term targets of Odisha Vision Document 2036 for Disaster Management along
with Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (SFDRR) 2015-20130, as well as the
Honourable Prime Minister’s 10 point agenda for disaster risk reduction have been taken
into active consideration for preparation of the State Disaster Management Plan.

Chapter II
Vulnerability Assessment and Risk
Analysis
2.1 Vulnerability to various Hazards: Figure:2.1
The unique geo-climatic
conditions of Odisha make
the State vulnerable to
various natural disasters.
Odisha has a history of
recurring natural disasters.
On the east, the State is
surrounded by Bay of
Bengal and has a coastline
length of 480 km. Though
the coastline is about 17%
of the east coast, Odisha has been affected by nearly 35% of all the cyclonic and severe
cyclonic storms that have crossed the eastern coast and associated storm surges that have
often inundated large tracts of the coastal districts. Similarly, the Mahanadi and her
tributaries have the potential to cause very severe floods. Odisha has 10 other major river
systems which cause flood in regular intervals. Out of a total geographical area of 15, 571
lakh hectares, 1.40 lakh hectares are very flood prone. The State is also vulnerable to
flash floods and landslides.
The frequency, intensity and extent of droughts in the State are gradually on the
rise. This is leading to crop failure, decline in surface and groundwater level, increasing
unemployment and under-employment, migration and indebtedness. Drought is
particularly frequent and severe in the Western districts of the State.
A portion of the State is prone to moderate earthquakes. In addition, the State is
also affected by disasters like severe heat waves, epidemics, forest fire, road accidents
etc.

The record of previous disasters in the State substantiates the fact that the State is
prone to one or more forms of natural disasters. There are many instances where a
particular area has been struck by a number of disasters simultaneously or repeatedly by
one or the other type of disasters.
Details of areas vulnerable to floods, cyclones and earthquakes:
Table:2.1
Type of Hazard Particulars % of Area
vulnerable
Flood
Flood Prone 1.9%
Flood Protected 2.4%
Outside Flood Area 95.7%
Cyclone
198-180 km/h 24.1%
169.2 km/h 3.3%
158.9-140.9 km/h 72.6%
Earthquake
Low damage risk Zone 84.2%
Moderate damage risk zone 15.8%
Source: Vulnerability Atlas of India, 1997
The table below indicates the occurrence of major disaster in the State during last
20 years. Table:2.2
Year Calamity
1996 Drought
1997 Drought
1998 Drought, Heat wave
1999 Super Cyclone
2000 Drought
2001 Floods
2002 Drought
2003 Floods
2004 Floods
2005 Floods
2006 Floods
2007 Floods (July)
(Aug & Sept)
2008 Floods(June & September )
2009 Flood & Heavy rain
Drought / Pest Attack

2010 Flood & Heavy rain
Drought &
Unseasonal Cyclonic Rain
2011 Drought &
Flood
2012 Drought &
Flood
2013 Very severe cyclonic storm `Phailin’ & Flood
2014 Flood &
Very severe cyclonic storm ‘Hudhud’
2015 Drought,
Flood & Heavy Rain
(Source: Office of the Special Relief Commissioner)
2.2 Major Disasters during 2006-07 and 2017-18
A brief profile of major disasters occurred in the State during 2006-07 to 2017-18 and
their impact is given below. Table:2.3
Sl.
No
.
Disaste
r
Year No. of
Distric
ts
Affect
ed
No of
Villages
Affected
No.
of
Death
s
Affected
Populatio
n
Livest
ock
Loss
Houses
Damage
d
Damage
and loss of
Crop Area
(in
Hectares)
1 Flood 2006-07 27 18912 105 6739168 1656 130460 249488
2007-08 15 5677 91 4235627 19495 76902 197000
2008-09 20 9794 110 4523590 1677 258155 382080
2009-10 17 2711 59 661000 - 13547 2399
2010-11 6 889 14 89700 1454 5402 30212
2011-12 21 6473 82 6000000 1493 176980 260256
2012-13 5 1059 3 61000 23 14655 1061
2013-14 18 18374 23 - - - 651590
2014-15 27 5573 61 4000000 187 49061 397538
2015-16 14 953 09 494088 - 1739 46135
2016-17 6 - 3 15100 - - -
2017-18 08 606 09 514669 - 5136 51531

2 Droug
ht
2008-09 5 463 - - - - -
2009-10 18 5294 - - - - -
2010-11 17 10674 - - - - -
2011-12 21 14119 - - - - -
2012-13 4 314 - - - - -
2015-16 27 29175 - - - - 1492565
2016-17 4 508 - - - - 22658.35
2017-18 15 6021 335548
3 Fire 2006-07 30 3941 27 - 79 - -
2007-08 30 4341 12 - 54 - -
2008-09 30 4563 21 - 17 - -
2009-10 27 5346 26 - 187 - -
2010-11 29 4721 9 16 - -
2011-12 30 - 21 - 104 - -
2012-13 30 6939 36 - 173 - -
2014-15 30 4368 25 - 153 - -
2015-16 29 3852 26 - 63 - -
2016-17 30 3935 92 - 195 - -
2017-18 30 3355 107 - 140
4 Hail
Storm
2006-07 6 125 2 2216 - 981 -
2007-08 13 149 6 130 2 2406 4372.8
2008-09 3 18 20 10000 512 2258 3694.22
2009-10 4 4 5 - - 100 -
2010-11 9 252 14 - - 2308 194.51
2011-12 12 120 5 - - 1750 -
2012-13 8 - - - - 2957 -
2014-15 1 - 1 - - - -
2015-16 4 - 5 - - - -
2016-17 6 - 7 - - - -

2017-18 11 9
5 Cyclon
e
2013-14 18 18374 21 13235000 4502 541200 651590
2014-15 15 9657 3 3343966 670 44236 247557
6 Pest
Attack
2006-07 3 - - - - - 4571
2017-18 24 8394 - 142723.18
7 Lightni
ng
2006-07 30 - 204 - - -
2007-08 30 - 351 - - - -
2008-09 30 - 362 - - - -
2009-10 28 - 214 - - - -
2010-11 30 - 227 - - - -
2011-12 28 - 353 - - - -
2012-13 30 - 265 - - - -
2014-15 30 - 309 - - - -
2015-16 30 - 400 - - - -
2016-17 29 - 398 - - - -
2017-18 29 465
8 Heat
Wave
2006-07 12 - 21 - - - -
2007-08 18 - 47 - - - -
2008-09 16 - 68 - - - -
2009-10 19 - 87 - - - -
2010-11 19 - 100 - - - -
2011-12 8 - 22 - - - -
2012-13 20 - 84 - - - -
2013-14 7 - 16 - - - -
2014-15 15 - 40 - - - -
2015-16 6 - 18 - - - -
2016-17 17 - 52 - - - -
2017-18 17 43

9 Tornad
o
2008-09 1 12 16 10000 - 1425 134.66
10 Heavy
Rain
2015-16 5 - 5 - - - -
2016-17 1 - 1 - - - -
11 Boat
Accide
nts
(Other
than
during
Flood)
2015-16 5 - 17 - - - -
2016-17 2 - 7 - - - -
2017-18 4 4
12 Drown
ing
(Other
than
during
Flood)
2015-16 26 - 191 - - - -
2016-17 26 - 418 - - - -
2017-18 29 820
13 Snake
Bite(Ot
her
than
during
Flood)
2015-16 23 - 305 - - - -
28 - 542 - - - -
2017-18 30 824
(Source: Office of the Special Relief Commissioner)

2.3 Disaster Specific Vulnerability:
I) Vulnerability to floods: Figure:2.2
Amongst all the natural disasters afflicting the State, floods are the most frequent
and devastating. Almost 80% of the annual rainfall is concentrated over a short monsoon
period of 3 months. While the coastal plains are very flat, the slopes in the inlands are
precipitous. This leads to heavy siltation, flash floods and poor discharge of flood waters
into the sea and thus the embankments are breached with alarming frequency.
In Odisha, damages due to floods are caused mainly by the rivers like Mahanadi,
Brahmani and Baitarani, which have a common delta where floodwater intermingles
(when in spate) and wreak considerable havoc. The problem is further accentuated when
flood synchronizes with high tide. The silt deposited constantly by these rivers in the
delta area raises the bed levels. The rivers often overflow their banks or break through
new channels causing heavy damages. Floods and drainage congestion also affect the
lower reaches along the Subarnarekha, the Rusikulya, the Vansadhara and Budha Balanga
rivers and cause massive floods.
The entire coastal belt is prone to storm surges, throughout the monsoon season,
which is usually accompanied with heavy rainfall thus making the estuary region
vulnerable to both storm surges and river flooding. A few districts in the western part of
Odisha are prone to flash floods.

Nearly 80% of the rainfall in the State occurs within 3 months, which also
coincides with the main cropping season. High population densities in the flood-prone
coastal and delta regions, increased encroachment in the flood plains because of
comparatively better livelihood opportunities and development are important contributors
to the increased vulnerability to flood. Poor socio-economic condition of the majority
living in the flood plains and the local economy being primarily dependent on the
monsoon paddy add to the vulnerability of the community.
II) Vulnerability to Cyclones:
The East Coast of India is one of the six most cyclone-prone areas in the world. Of all,
severe cyclones that make landfall on the eastern coast, 20 percent hit Odisha, particularly
during April – May and September – November. Once in every 2 - 3 decades, a severe
cyclone strikes Odisha. All the coastal districts are vulnerable to cyclones.
After the 1999 super cyclone, the State Government has taken measures like
installation of modern communication systems, construction of cyclone shelters and other
improved infrastructure like pucca houses for the poor in the cyclone prone areas to
reduce the physical vulnerability of the coastal districts to cyclonic winds and tidal
surges. However, poor socio economic conditions, weak housing, large settlements
(including densely populated islands near the sea coast) in areas extremely prone to tidal
surges, depletion of mangroves and tree shelterbelts, location of highly hazardous
industries in cyclone prone areas, poor road communication to many villages near the
coast make the State vulnerable to cyclones.
Nearly one third of the cyclones of the east coast of India visit Odisha coast. With
the current trend of the climatic variability accompanied with global warming and
increased green house effects, the coastal areas of Odisha are likely to be affected by
many more extreme cyclonic disturbances and low pressure systems of greater
magnitude.

Figure:2.3
Although the total number of cyclonic disturbances is more along the Odisha
coast, as a natural hazard, the severe storms are of greater public concern in view of their
large scale damage leading to loss of life and property. By taking together the storms and
severe storms, which mostly create havoc and incur greater amount of damage, the
Odisha Coastal Zone is twice more vulnerable in comparison to the other eastern States.
Recurrence Interval and Probability of Occurrence:
As regards the spatial variation in the vulnerability of the different sections of the
Odisha Coastal Zone, it is observed that it varies from Balasore to Ganjam (from north to
south) in a decreasing
order.
The disturbances which
develop in the pre and
post monsoon period
intensify into severe
storms of devastating
nature. It is revealed
from the past
experience that the most
Expected Maximum Tidal Surge
Figure.2.4

vulnerable months for the occurrence of a severe cyclone is October followed by the
month of September.
The source area of origin of the cyclonic disturbances in the Bay of Bengal
extends over the entire sea surface. But however the area to the west of Andaman coast
lying between 60N to 100N and 850E to 880E is a high probability source area of origin
for the severe storms. The second in the importance is the eastern part of the Andaman
Islands.
With regard to storms, the source area of origin in the Bay of Bengal remains
confined to two important locations, one to the 400 to 500 km east of the Gopalpur and
Vishakhapatnam and the other patch is 500 to 600 km east of Chennai and Rameswaram.
As regards the severe storms which had affected Odisha coast, their source area of origin
is located about 500 km. south of Paradip and east of Vishakhapatnam.
The cyclones which had affected Odisha coast are normally sea origin and land
dissipation. The cyclones of land origin and land dissipation or sea dissipation are
negligible. There are some cyclones which originate in the sea adjacent to the Odisha
coast and dissipate in the sea. Such events have not much impact on the Odisha Coastal
Zone.
III) Vulnerability to Droughts:
The normal rainfall of the State, calculated on the basis of the average of 50 years of
annual rainfall from 1901 to 1950 was 1503 mm, with 73 rainy days. The rainfall pattern
however started showing a declining trend over the last 50 years. The declining and
fluctuating decennial variation can be clearly seen from the figure given below.
(Source: Department of Agriculture & Office of the Special Relief Commissioner,
Govt. of Odisha.)
The average rainfall from 1950-99 stands at 1349 mm, a decline by more than
10% from the previous 50 years. The frequency of years with rainfall above the normal
and below the normal of 1503 mm rainfall is given in the Table below:
Table:2.4
Rainfall interval
(in mm)
Frequency during the decade
50’s 60’s 70’s 80’s 90’s Total
1500 and above 5 - 2 2 3 12
1499-1300 3 5 3 3 5 19

1299-1100 2 4 2 3 1 12
1099-1000 - - - 2 - 2
Less than 1000 - 1 3 - 1 5
Source: Department of Agriculture, Govt. of Odisha
Less than 1000 mm. of rainfall occurred 5 times during the last 50 years, in 1965,
1974, 1976, 1979 and 1996. All these happened to be severe drought years in the sense
that caused considerable reduction in Kharif rice production. Severe droughts also
occurred, once in 1987-88, when the rainfall was 1041 mm and again in 1982-83, when
the rainfall was 1091mm. But the year 1982-83, witnessed both flood and drought, when
the rainfall for the entire month of August was received in a few days, and then the rains
ceased completely afterwards. However, no trend can be observed in occurrence of
droughts as the decade of the 70’s accounted for the most number of drought years. It is
therefore very difficult to make any prediction about the drought. From the past data, it
can be observed that there is at least one severe drought year in every decade.
State receives 80% of the rainfall during the monsoon months from JuneSeptember. Of late, the quantum and distribution of rainfall over time and space has
tended to be deficient, erratic and uneven. The rainfall deficiency in the monsoon season
varied from 26% to 36%, seven times during the last 35 years causing severe droughts
and crop loss. Moderate droughts have also occurred, singly and in conjunction with
floods, in 1966, 1972, 1980, 1981, 1982, 1984, and 1998. Thus droughts are very
frequent, affecting some parts of the State, almost every alternate year. Droughts in
Odisha generally occur during the Kharif season and are harmful mainly to the paddy
crop. Non paddy Kharif crops like Maize, Ragi, Millets, Pulses and oilseeds generally are
not affected as the quantum of monsoon rainfall received even in the worst drought years
is more that 750 mm, which is quite sufficient for these crops. In years of poor rainfall,
even irrigated areas also suffer due to insufficient storage in the reservoirs.
The pattern of drought in the State is of a varied one, sometime affecting the entire
State, sometimes a few regions, and sometimes a few districts. However, the contiguous
patch consisting of the subdivisions of Padamapur, Bolangir, Titilagarh, Patnagarh,
Nuapada, Khariar, Bhawanipatna and Phulbani comprising of 47 blocks have been
identified as chronic drought-prone zones. The construction of Upper Indravati Project
has considerably improved the position in Bhawanipatna Sub division. Many other areas
also have started showing improvement during the 90’s, but all these areas still need close
monitoring.

Risk Assessment:
The impact of the drought is mainly felt in agriculture, resulting in loss of
production. Besides crop loss, droughts also create problems of irrigation and drinking
water, loss of employment, scarcity of essential commodities, migration of farm
labourers, increasing rural indebtedness, land and asset alienation, etc. People who get
worst affected are small and marginal farmers, agricultural labourers.
IV) Vulnerability to heat wave:
Climatic changes, decrease in tree cover, depletion of ground water resources and
increase in day temperature especially during the months of May and June, have made
majority of the districts of the State vulnerable to heat wave. In 1998, the State witnessed
a severe heat wave, which claimed over 2,000 lives. Several districts also suffered from
extreme scarcity of drinking water.
The heat wave condition in Odisha is becoming increasingly prominent and
regular. However, the main risk due to heat wave is heat stroke. After the large number
of deaths in 1998, the main causal factor was identified as lack of awareness about coping
with heat wave and not following certain do’s and don’ts during heat wave conditions.
Though extensive awareness campaigns has reduced large number of fatalities in post
1998, poor socio-economic conditions, lack of enforcement and adoption of good
working conditions during the summer months remain the main risks of heat wave.
V) Vulnerability to Lightning:
Lightning has been the biggest killer in the State. During last 7 years lightning has taken
2408 lives more than any other natural disaster during the period. On an average it takes
around 350 lives each year. Most deaths occur during the months from May to August
(about 71%). High occurrence of deaths has been observed in Mayurbhanj, Ganjam,
Keonjhar, Sundergarh, Cuttack, Balasore, Dhenkanal, Jajpur, Khordha and Nawarangpur
districts. About one third of lightning deaths took place while working in paddy fields.
As per reports received from the Collectors, as many as 1261 lightning deaths have
occurred in the State during the last 3 years, i.e., from 2015-16 to 2017-18.
2015-16 : 399
2016-17 : 397
2017-18 : 465
Total : 1261 (Source: Office of the Special Relief Commissioner)

VI) Vulnerability to Drowning:
Drowning (other than during flood) has been declared as a ‘State Specific Disaster’ by the
Government of Odisha with effect from 1st April 2015. The Collectors have been
reporting the cases of deaths due to drowning to the Special Relief Commissioner. As per
the reports received from the Collectors, as many as 1494 deaths due to Drowning have
occurred in the State during the last 3 years, i.e., from 2015-16 to 2017-18.
2015-16 : 246
2016-17 : 428
2017-18 : 820
Total : 1494 (Source: Office of the Special Relief Commissioner)

VII) Vulnerability to Snake Bite
Snakebite has been declared as a ‘State Specific Disaster’ by the Government of Odisha
with effect from 1st April 2015. From then onwards, the Collectors have been reporting
the cases of death due to snakebite to the Special Relief Commissioner. As per reports
received from the Collectors, as many as 1844 snakebite deaths have occurred in the State
during the last 3 years, i.e., from 2015-16 to 2017-18.
2015-16 : 446
2016-17 : 574
2017-18 : 824
Total : 1844

(Source: Office of the Special Relief Commissioner)
VIII) Vulnerability to Tornadoes:
The State has had past histories of tornados and is also vulnerable to hail storms, thunder
and lightning deaths or injury nearly every year.
IX) Vulnerability to Earthquakes:
Records of historical seismicity indicate activity along the Odisha coastal belt. Current
seismicity is related to activity along Gondwana Basin boundary faults and those
associated with continent-oceanic crust transition zone in the Bay of Bengal. Within the
Mahanadi coastal basin, several subsurface faults trending in E-W, NE-SW and NW-SE
directions but mostly curvilinear in nature have been interpreted from DSS profile.
As per the recent categorization, the country has been divided into four zones (II,
III, IV and V) and Odisha falls between Zones II and III i.e. low damage risk zone and
moderate damage risk zones. However, it may be noted that major part of Gujarat,
including Ahmedabad, also comes in the moderate risk zone but Ahmedabad City was
badly affected by the impact of the Bhuj 2001 earthquake. The details of the location of
the districts, according to seismic zones, are given in the Table below:
Table:2.5

District Coming Under Moderate Risk
Zones (Zone-III)
Districts Coming Under Low damage
Risk Zones (Zone-II)
Sundargarh, Jharsuguda, Bargarh,
Sambalpur, Deogarh, Anugul, Dhenkanal,
Jajpur, Cuttack, Khurda, Puri,
Jagatsighpur, Kendrapada, Bhadrak,
Mayurbhanj, Balasore.
Malkanagiri, Korapur, Rayagada, Gajapati,
Ganjam, Kandhamala, Nawrangpur,
Kalahandi, Nuapada, Bolangir, Sonepur,
Boud, Nayagarh, Keonjhar,
Figure:2.5
While the entire district of Jagatsighpur comes under the Moderate Damage Risk
Zone only, parts of all other districts mentioned in the moderate risk zone also come
under low damage risk zones. Apart from the State capital, important cities like Cuttack,
Sambalpur, Bargarh, Anugul, Puri, important industrial installations, the Paradeep Port
and the Hirakud dam
also fall under moderate
risk zone.
X) Vulnerability to
Tsunami:
Odisha coast is
vulnerable to tsunami.
Tsunami Travel Time Atlas
Figure:2.6

328 villages covering 6 coastal districts located within 1.5 km of the coastline are
identified as tsunami prone villages. Though there is no specific tsunami event in the
recent past, the disaster cannot be ruled out. As per the scientific study conducted by IIT,
Kharagpur, the State may experience tsunami within 4 hour, if the tsunami occurs at the
nearest point in the Indo-Burman plate.
XI) Coastal Vulnerability Index (CVI)
The risk classes due to individual input parameters/factors for the Odisha state are
tabulated below. It indicates that the coastal slope and elevation are the very risk factors
affecting the coastal length of 453 km and 384 km respectively. The shoreline change rate
and the tidal range factors account for very low risk representing 228 km and 201 km
respectively.
Parameter Length of Risk Classes along the Coastline(Km)
Very Low Low Medium High Very High
Shoreline Change Rate 228 134 38 32 65
Coastal Slope 9 6 6 22 453
Coastal Elevation 6 - 18 89 384
Geomorphology - 254 38 80 124
Sea Level Change Rate 45 56 118 67 211
Mean Significant Wave
Height
80 58 93 105 161
Tidal Range 201 91 76 64 63
(Source: Coastal Vulnerability Atlas of India-2012, INCOIS)
The CVI assessment for the Odisha state indicates that a length of 37 km (~7.51%) is
under Very High Vulnerable Category. The major class is the Medium Vulnerable
recording a length of 267 km (~53.78%); whereas Low and High Vulnerable classes
recorded a length of 106 km and 86 km (constituting 21.29 % and 17.42%) respectively.
The spatial distribution of the vulnerability classes along the coast of the state is shown
in table above. The coastal stretches of Puri, Jagatsinghpur, Kendrapada, Bhadrak and
Baleswar recorded High to Very High Vulnerable classes. In general, the CVI analysis
shows the northern part of the coast as Medium to Very High Vulnerable expect for a few

low category patches; whereas the southern parts of the state were categorized as Medium
to Low Vulnerable classes.
Statics of CVI along Odisha
CVI Length (Km) % of Length
Low 106 21.29
Medium 267 53.78
High 86 17.42
Very High 37 7.51
Total 496 100.00
(Source: Coastal Vulnerability Atlas of India-2012, INCOIS)
XII) Vulnerability to Industrial/ Chemical disasters:
Over the years, there is substantial increase in industrial activities in the State. Many
industries in the State handle and process large volume of hazardous chemicals. This has
caused potential threat to the employees, general public and environment in general.
Many technological accidents have occurred in the State as well as in the country
damaging lives and properties. The leakage of ammonia gas from OSWAL Fertilizer and
Chemicals at Paradeep during the 1999 super cyclone has reflected the seriousness of the
Coastal Vulnerability Index

problem. Some areas in the State have been identified which are having cluster of
industries handling hazardous chemicals and thus pose chemical and industrial disaster.
The details of districts having Major Accident Hazard (MAH) installations and 2 (cb)
factories are given below.
Sl.
No.
District No. of MAH
Factories
No. of 2 (cb) factories including
MAH
1 Angul 4 29
2 Balasore 1 42
3 Dhenkanal 3 26
4 Ganjam 1 23
5 Jagatsinghpur 8 15
6 Jajpur 3 35
7 Jharsuguda 3 38
8 Khordha 4 68
9 Koraput 1 12
10 Mayurbhanj 1 18
11 Rayagada 1 13
12 Sambalpur 1 25
13 Sundergarh 4 122
14 Baragarh - 12
15 Bhadrak - 4
16 Bolangir - 5
17 Cuttack - 45
18 Deogarh - 2
19 Kalahandi - 3
20 Keonjhar - 35
21 Nayagarh - 2
22 Malkangiri - 4
23 Puri - 2
Total= 35 580
Source: Directorate F & B, Odisha
List of districts with type of hazards are given in the Table below.
Table:2.6
Sl. Area District Types of Hazardous Chemicals
Handled
Type of Hazard
1. Paradeep Jagatsinghpur Ammonia, Phosphoric Acid,
Sulphuric Acid, Petroleum
Products
Toxic Gas Leak,
Fire
2. Rourkela Sundargarh Carbon Monoxide, Liquid
Oxygen, Ammonia, Hydrogen,
Fire, Explosion,
Toxic Gas

Naphtha, Chlorine, Petroleum
Products, Explosives (Secondary),
Acids
3. Ganjam Ganjam Chlorine, Petroleum Product Toxic Gas
4. Cuttack Cuttack Chlorine, Petroleum Product Toxic Gas, Fire
5. Talcher Angul Ammonia, Carbon Monoxide,
Naphtha, Chlorine, Petroleum
Products, Explosives
Toxic Gas, Fire,
Explosion
6. Balasore Balasore Chlorine, LPG, Naphtha,
Petroleum Products
Fire, Toxic Gas
7. Jharsuguda
– Belpahar
Jharsuguda LPG, Petroleum Products,
Explosives
Fire
8. Rayagada Rayagada Chlorine Toxic Gas
(Source: State Pollution Control Board, Odisha)
Odisha does not have any nuclear industry. Large industries contribute to the
Toxic Pollution of the environment. The petroleum products, including various storage
places, are also potential hazardous locations. Increased industrial activities and the risks
of hazards caused by accidents during transitions of hazardous materials have increased
the vulnerability of the State to industrial and chemical hazards.
XIII) Vulnerability to Accidents:
Road accidents are major challenges to be handled with care. The figures are however not
complete since each and every accident case is not reported at the police stations. Thus,
the actual number or road accident cases may be still higher.
With the stagnation in the growth of railways and neglected network of other
modes of transport, like waterways and airways in the State, road transport obviously acts
as the principal mode of transportation, as has been evident during the last few decades.
The increase in the number of vehicles has also increased the unsafe practices and risks of
road users. The State is also vulnerable to train and air accidents, boat capsize, festival
related disasters, fire and electrical accidents.
XIV) Fire Accidents:
Fire accidents are quite common, especially in rural areas because of the following factors
1. Individual housing with roof of straw and storage of straw/ hay in close proximity
of the house.
2. Close proximity of houses in many areas leading to spread of fire and wider
destruction.

3. Lack of availability of adequate water and nil or poor equipment for firefighting
especially in rural areas and small towns.
4. Lack of awareness on basic do’s and don’ts, when people live in houses that uses
inflammable materials.
5. Human error or carelessness.
The State is also becoming increasingly vulnerable to electrical accidents. The main
causes of such accidents are:
(a) Use of substandard electrical fittings
(b) Lack of check up of overused electrical items
(c) Lack of trained electricians
(d) A combination of the above factors
XV) Religious gatherings:
There are large gatherings in selected festivals like the car festival at Puri where
possibilities of festival related disasters like epidemics, stampedes are quite high.
XIII) Vulnerability to Biological Hazards:
(a) Biological hazards to human beings:
All natural disasters are usually followed by conditions susceptible to epidemics or
communicable diseases and non-communicable diseases like psychological trauma,
malnutrition, etc. Epidemics and biological hazards are potential threats to Odisha
because:
 Odisha is prone to many water and vector borne communicable diseases, which
get compounded by poor health knowledge, poor sanitation and scarcity of
drinking water
 Ecological changes and regular impact of different kinds of natural disasters like
floods, cyclones, droughts and climatic disorders like heat wave create a favorable
climate for emergence of new types of pathogenic agents.
 The Malaria upsurge in non-endemic areas and drug resistance to malaria in
endemic areas is a matter of increasing concern to the State.
 There is always the potential threat of outbreak of enzoonotic diseases in rural and
tribal areas.
 Food poisoning from eating inedible roots and tubers. It is quite common in tribal
areas.
 Industrial/chemical health hazards are potential dangers to many industrial belts of
Odisha.

 Increase in urbanization leading to a rise in the number of slum dwellers with
extremely poor sanitation and drinking water facilities, very poor health
awareness and the increasing risk of waterborne diseases and transportation of
vector borne diseases from endemic to non-endemic areas.
 The possibility of international travelers/tourists bringing in new types of diseases.
 Large numbers of people from Odisha migrate to other parts of the country in
search of livelihood, which increases the threats of STD, AIDS and other such
diseases.
 The possibility of the use of biological and chemical weapons by terrorists cannot
be ruled out in any corner of the globe.
(b) Epidemics amongst animals:
The main diseases and the causal factors that affect animals in the State are:
 Poor disease surveillance system
 Lack of trained personnel, poor equipments and communication systems
 Traditional beliefs of not slaughtering cows in spite of the animal being infected
by diseases like TB, Anthrax, etc. leading to spread of the disease to human
beings and sometimes death.
Socio-economic Vulnerability:
The vulnerability of an area is determined by the capacity of its social, physical,
environmental and economic structures to withstand and respond to hazards. An analysis
of the vulnerability in a given geographic location, an understanding of the socioeconomic factors and the capability of the community to cope with disasters, gives an
understanding to the development and disaster managers to plan for risk reduction against
future hazards.
Besides estimation of the housing damage risk, the other socio economic vulnerability
factors also need attention from the disaster managers. It is seen that the people below
poverty line, the fisherman families who are mostly coastal inhabitants, the primary
workers, single women families, disabled persons, the children in the age group of 0-6
years and the aged are some of the most vulnerable population to be affected by cyclones.
They have neither the minimum capacities to withstand the damage nor they have the
economic support to recover from the losses incurred in the hazards and come to normalcy
as far as the securities of the basic living needs are concerned. Similarly the other
economic and institutional vulnerability remains with the grass root level institutional

infrastructure done at the community and panchayat level such as dispensaries, primary
schools, village roads, orchards and plantation area, standing kharif crops which constitute
the backbone of the rural economy and community support system. Very often the village
road networks get affected which deprive the communication and linkage in the aftermath
of the hazards and render the communities isolated from the supply and linkage network.
The limited community and panchayat level resources can hardly be sufficient for
restoration and the problem continues as a vicious cycle.
One of the most important occupational groups are rural artisans and weavers.
Traditional equipments and looms, poor infrastructure, inadequate training, poor
marketing network, limited scope for value addition, lack of product diversification,
competition from product substitutes, etc. plague the artisans and weavers. Their socioeconomic condition is further affected by disasters and forces them to convert into daily
wage earners, small and marginal farmers. Disasters like floods and cyclones have
destroyed their rudimentary infrastructure, product stock and equipment making them
extremely vulnerable to disasters.
While in the cyclone and flood prone areas people lose their livelihood infrastructure,
animals and tools, people living in chronic drought prone areas are forced to often sell
their productive assets under distress conditions.
Social Structure:
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes account for about 38.5% of the State’s population
and they constitute a high percentage of the lower income and expenditure group who are
relatively disadvantaged in terms of assets, education, income and land. A large section
of the tribal people lives near forest areas and depend on collection and marketing of
forest produces and rain-fed agriculture for their sustenance. However, reduction in
employment generating forestry operations, degrading forest resources have been forcing
them to change their occupational pattern. No matter what occupational group the poor
belong to, their socio-economic vulnerability, weak coping mechanisms, lack of
alternative employment and income opportunities and poor infrastructure, make these
sections of the poor extremely vulnerable to disasters
Education:
Education is a basic requirement that helps in improving the coping capacities of
the population. But the literacy pattern in the State is quite skewed and the percentage of
literacy amongst vulnerable communities, particularly the Scheduled Castes and Tribes is
very low. For these people inadequate or lack of education becomes a strong detriment

for exploring alternative occupational or employment opportunities in the event of a
disaster.
Gender discrimination:
Even though women constitute nearly half of the population, they are more
vulnerable to disasters because of socio-cultural barriers to various forms of livelihood
opportunities. Added to this, women have very few resources over which they have
exclusive rights or control. They also have reduced mobility due to existing socio-cultural
practices, which make women more vulnerable to disaster impacts. Thus, lack of access
to better livelihood and education, discrimination in work status and wage earning
capacity, lack of alternative employment opportunities coupled with their marginalized
social status, make women more vulnerable to disasters. The vulnerability of women and
other marginalized sections also lead to poor access to information and hence are
discriminated against during relief and rehabilitation phases after disasters.
People need special care:
Children, old and infirm people, mentally retarded are more vulnerable to disasters. A
large number of children have poor education, inadequate access to health care, nutrition
and shelter. A sizeable number of children are orphans. There are also disabled children
and persons in rural and urban areas. The State has a high concentration of aged people,
widows, sick and malnourished persons. The above categories of people including
pregnant women are the most vulnerable during and after disasters because of their
physical vulnerability and also their lack of capacity for earning their livelihood.
Urbanization:
The State has increasing trends of people migrating from rural areas to towns and cities in
search of employment and livelihood. Urbanization has led to high rates of migration to
cities, in search of employment opportunities. This has led to increase in the density of
population in towns and cities. The majority of the immigrants usually belong to the
lower income strata of population. The increasing influx of poor immigrants to an area
adds pressure on the existing infrastructure and land resources. Being poor, these
immigrants settle in slums or areas vulnerable to disasters and lacking in basic
infrastructure like safe drinking water, sanitation and drainage facilities. The immigrant
population as well as the number of slums are on the rise in cities like Bhubaneswar,
Cuttack, Rourkela, Samablpur, Berhampur, Anugul, Jharsuguda, Bargarh and Khurda and
these slums are vulnerable to all forms of natural and man-made disasters. Lack of spatial

urban planning has led to unplanned growth of towns and cities. Majority of the cities
have extremely inadequate drainage, waste management and sanitation facilities. This
makes the population highly vulnerable to various diseases. Narrow roads, poorly
maintained overhead electric and telephone wires, and congested drains make these
settlements vulnerable during floods and cyclones.

Chapter –III
Preventive Measures
Prevention is an important aspect of disaster management. Prevention may be described
as measures designed to prevent natural phenomenon from causing or resulting in disaster
or other related emergency situations. Clearly, not all emergencies can be prevented, so
the concept is taken to have a much broader meaning. Prevention actions concern the
formulation of long-range policies and programs to prevent or eliminate the occurrence of
disasters.
3.1 Institutional Arrangements for Disaster Management:
3.1.1 National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)
The National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) was constituted under the Subsection (1) of Section (3) of National Disaster Management Act 2005. NDMA is the apex
body for Disaster Management in the country headed by the Hon’ble Prime Minister of
India to lay down policies, plans and guidelines to manage disaster and coordinating their
enforcement and implementation for ensuring timely and effective response to disaster.
The Chairperson of the NDMA is the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India (ex-officio)
and others members not exceeding more than nine may be nominated by him. The
Chairperson may designate one of the members to be the Vice-Chairperson. (Source-DM
Act-2005)
3.1.2 National Executive Committee (NEC)
The central government has constituted a National Executive Committee (NEC) under
sub-section (1) of Section (8) of DM Act-2005 to assist the National Disaster
Management Authority in the discharge of its function and also ensure compliance of the
directions issued by the central government.
The Union Home Secretary is the Chairpersons (ex-officio) of NEC. The
Secretaries to the Government of India in the ministries/departments having
administrative control of the agriculture, defense, drinking water supply, environment and
forests, finance (expenditure), health, power, rural development, science and technology,
space, telecommunication, urban development, water resources and Chief of the
Integrated Defence Staff of the Chiefs of Staff Committee are other members of NEC.
(Source-DM Act-2005)
3.1.3 State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA)
The State Disaster Management Authorities (SDMA) has to be constituted by every state

government under the subsection (1) & (2) of Section 14 of Disaster Management Act
2005. The Hon’ble Chief Ministers of the state are the Chairpersons (ex-officio) of SDMA
and other members not exceeding eight may be nominated by the Chairpersons. The other
members are:
1. Hon’ble Minister, Revenue and DM -Member-cum-Vice Chairperson
2. Hon’ble Minister, Agriculture -Member
3. Hon’ble Minister, Finance -Member
4. Chief Secretary -Member-cum-Ex-Officio, Chief Executive Officer
5. Development Commissioner/ Addl. Development Commissioner -Member
6. Secretary, Home Department -Member
7. Secretary, Department of Water Resources -Member
8. Secretary, Agriculture Department -Member
9. Secretary, Revenue and DM Department –Member
The Chairman of the State Executive Committee (SEC), Chief Secretary of the
State is a member and Chief Executive Officer (ex-officio) of SDMA. Office of the
Special Relief Commissioner has been designated as the secretariat of the SDMA. The
Special Relief Commissioner has been declared as the additional CEO.
The State Disaster Management Authority shall-:
a) Lays down policies and plans for disaster management in the State.
b) Approves the State Plan in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the
NDMA.
c) Coordinates the implementation of the State Plan, recommend provision of
funds for mitigation and preparedness measures.
d) Review the developmental plans of different departments of the State to
ensure the integration of prevention, preparedness and mitigation measures.
e) Lay down guidelines to be followed by the departments of the State
Government for the purpose of integration of measures for prevention of
disasters and mitigation in their development plans and projects and
provide necessary technical assistance there for.
f) Review the measures being taken for mitigation, capacity building and
preparedness by the departments of the Government & issue such
guidelines as may be necessary.

g) Lay down detailed guidelines for providing standards of relief (Not less than
the minimum standard of relief in the guidelines of NDMA) to persons
affected by disaster in the State. (Source-DM Act-2005)
3.1.4 State Executive Committee (SEC)
The State Executive Committee (SEC) has been constituted by the State Governments
under sub-section (1) & (2) of Section (20) to assist the State Disaster Management
Authority (SDMA) in the performance of its function and to coordinate action in
accordance with the guidelines laid down by the SDMA and ensure the compliances of
directions issued by the State Government under the DM act. The Chief Secretaries of the
States are the Chairman of SEC (ex-officio). Four Secretaries of State Government are the
other member’s ex-officio. The Chairperson of SEC use powers delegated by SDMAs
and state Governments.
 Chief Secretary - Chairperson, Ex-officio
 Development Commissioner/Addl. Development Commissioner - Member
 Agriculture Production Commissioner - Member
 Secretary, Revenue and DM Department - Member
 Special Relief Commissioner - Member
The State Executive Committee shall-:
a) Coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National Policy, National
Plan and State Plan.
b) Examine the vulnerability of different parts of the State to different forms of
disaster and specify measures to be taken for their prevention and mitigation.
c) Lay down guidelines for preparation of disaster management plans by the
departments of the Government of the State and the District authorities and
monitor the implementation of the plans.
d) Evaluate preparedness at all government and non-government levels to
respond to any threatening disaster situation or disaster and give all directions
where necessary for enhancing such preparedness. (Source-DM Act-2005).
3.1.5 Revenue and Disaster Management Department:
The Revenue and Disaster Management Department is responsible for providing
immediate relief to the people affected by various calamities like floods, droughts,
cyclones, hailstorms, earthquakes, fire accidents, etc. It also takes initiatives for relief,
rescue, rehabilitation and restoration work. The Department is headed by the Principal

Secretary/Addl. Chief Secretary, Revenue and Disaster Management Department who
exercises all administrative and financial powers.
3.1.6 Special Relief Organization:
The Special Relief Organisation was established under the Board of Revenue in 1965-66
for carrying out relief and rescue operation during and after various disasters. Since its
inception, the scope of Relief Organisation has been diversified. Now it deals with
disaster management i.e. response, relief and rehabilitation. It coordinates with
districts/departments for quick relief and rescue operation, reconstruction and
rehabilitation work. It also promotes disaster preparedness at all levels in the State with
the assistance of Odisha State Disaster Management Authority (OSDMA). Quick
response at the time of natural calamities is the hall-mark of Special Relief Organisation.
3.1.7 Odisha State Disaster Management Authority (OSDMA):
Odisha State Disaster Mitigation Authority (OSDMA) was established by the
Government of Odisha as an autonomous organization vides Finance Department
Resolution No. IFC- 74/99-51779/F dated the 28th December 1999 (in the intermediate
aftermath of the Super-cyclone in 1999). It was registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 on 29.12.1999 as a non-profit making & charitable institution for
the interest of the people of Odisha, with its headquarters at Bhubaneswar and jurisdiction
over the whole State.
The Authority has the mandate not only to take up the mitigation activities but
also the relief, restoration, reconstruction and other measures. These activities cover the
entire gamut of disaster management including preparedness activities and also include:
a) Coordination with the line departments involved in reconstruction,
b) Coordination with bilateral and multi-lateral aid agencies,
c) Coordination with UN Agencies, International, National and State-level NGOs,
d) Networking with similar and relevant organizations for disaster management.
3.1.8 State Level Committee on Natural Calamities (SLCNC)
A State Level Committee on Natural Calamity (SLCNC) has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of the Hon’ble Chief Minister to oversee disaster preparedness and
response activities.
The Function of the SLCNC is -:
a) To advise the State Government regarding precautionary measures to be ta
ken in respect of flood, drought and other natural calamities.
b) To assess the situations arising out of such calamities.
c) To recommend to Government, the nature and quantum of relief; and

d) To recommend to Government, the Policy to be adopted in giving such
relief in areas affected by such calamities. (Source-DM Act-2005)
3.1.9 District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA)
Under the sub-section (1) of section 14 of DM Act 2005.District Disaster Management
Authority has been constituted by the State Government. The District Disaster
Management Authority (DDMA) consists of the Chairperson and such number of the
other members, not exceeding seven, as may be prescribed by the State Government, and
unless the rules otherwise provide, it shall consist of the following namely: -
a) The Collector or District Magistrate or Deputy Commissioner of the
District is the Chairperson (ex-officio) of DDMA.
b) The elected representative of local authority is the Co-chairperson (exofficio) of DDMA.
Provided that in the Tribal Areas, as referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitutions, the Chief Executive Member of the district council of autonomous district,
shall be the co-Chairperson, ex officio
a) The Chief Executive of the District Authority, ex officio;
b) The Superintendent of Police, ex officio;
c) The Chief Medical Officer of the district, ex officio;
d) Not exceeding two other district level officers, to be appointed by the State
 Government
The State Government appoints an officer not below the rank of Additional
Collector or Additional District Magistrate or Additional Deputy Commissioner, as the
case may be of the District to be Chief Executive Officer of DDMA.
The DDMA acts as the district planning; coordinating and implementing body for
disaster management and take all measures for the purpose of disaster management in the
district in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the NDMA and SDMA.
The District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA) shall-:
a) Organize, coordinate and facilitate specialized training programmes and
awareness programmes for different level of officers, employees,
voluntary rescue workers and community members for prevention and
mitigation of disaster with support of governmental and non-governmental
organization and local authorities.

b) Set up, maintain, review and upgrade mechanism for early warning and
dissemination of proper information to public.
c) Review development plans prepared by the departments of the government
at the district level, statutory authorities with a view to make necessary
provisions therein for prevention of disaster or mitigation
d) Examine construction in any area in the district and ensure standards for
prevention of disaster or mitigation laid down for such construction to be
followed by the concerned departments and authorities.
e) Identify buildings and places which could be used as relief centers or
camps in the event of any disaster or disaster like situation and make
arrangements for water supply and sanitation in such buildings and places.
f) Establish stockpiles of relief and rescue materials or ensure preparedness
to make such materials available at short notice;
g) Encourage the involvement of Non-Government Organization and
Voluntary social – welfare institutions working at the grass root level in
the district for disaster management.
h) Ensure communication systems are in order and disaster management
drills are carried out periodically.
i) Perform such other functions as the State Government or State Authority
may assign to. (Source-DM Act-2005)
3.1.10 District Level Committee on Natural Calamities (DLCNC)
The Codal provision of Odisha Relief Code envisages the constitutions of District Level
Committee on Natural Calamity (DLCNC) which is the apex committee at the district to
monitor preparedness and suggests improvement in the response mechanism and finalizes
the district disaster management plans.
3.1.11 Institutional Mechanism for Disaster Management in Odisha
Figure: 3.1

3.1.12 State Crisis Group (SCG)
3.1.12.1 Constitution of State Crisis Group
1. The State Government shall constitute a State Crisis Group under the
Chairmanship of Chief Secretary for management of chemical accidents in the
State.
2. The State Crisis Group shall meet at least once in three months and follow such
procedure for transaction of business as it deems fit.
3. The State Crisis Group may co-opt any person whose assistance or advice is
considered useful in performing any of its functions, to participate in the
deliberation of any of its meetings.
3.1.12.2 Functions of the State Crisis Group
1. The State Crisis Group is the apex body in the State to deal with major chemical
accidents and to provide expert guidance for handling major chemical accidents.
2. Without prejudice to the functions specified under sub-rule (1), the State Crisis
Group shall, -
a) Review all district off-site emergency plans in the State with a view to
examine its adequacy in accordance with the Manufacture, Storage and
Import of Hazardous Chemicals, Rules and forward a report to the Central
Crisis Group once in three months;
b) Assist the State Government in managing chemical accidents at a site;
c) Assist the State Government in the planning, preparedness and mitigation
of major chemical accidents at a site in the State;
d) Continuously monitor the post accident situation arising out of a major
chemical accident in the State and forward a report to the Central Crisis
Group;
e) Review the progress report submitted by the District Crisis groups;
f) Respond to queries addressed to it by the District Crisis groups; Publish a
list of experts and officials in the State who are concerned with the
management of chemical accidents.
(Source–Internet: http://envfor.nic.in/divisions/hsmd/v3.html)

3.1.13 District Crisis Group (DCG)
3.1.13.1 Constitution of District Crisis Group
The District Crisis Group should be constituted under the Chairmanship of District
Collector to deal with major chemical accidents and to provide expert guidance for
handling chemical accidents
3.1.13.2 Function of District Crisis Group
The District Crisis Group shall, -
1. Assist in the preparation of the district off-site emergency plan;
2. Review all the on-site emergency plans prepared by the occupier of Major
Accident Hazards installation for the preparation of the district off-site emergency
plan;
3. Assist the district administration in the management of chemical accidents at a site
lying within the district;
4. Continuously monitor every chemical accident;
5. Ensure continuous information flow from the district to the Centre and State Crisis
Group regarding accident situation and mitigation efforts;
6. Forward a report of the chemical accident within fifteen days to the State Crisis
Group; Conduct at least one full-scale mock-drill of a chemical accident at a site
each year and forward a report of the strength and the weakness of the plan to the
State Crisis Group. (Source–Internet: http://envfor.nic.in/divisions/hsmd/v3.html)
3.1.14 Local Crisis Group
The Local Crisis Group is the body in the industrial pocket to deal with chemical
accidents and coordinate efforts in planning preparedness and mitigation of a chemical
accident;
The Local Crisis Group shall,-
1. Prepare local emergency plan for the industrial pocket;
2. Ensure dovetailing of the local emergency plan with the district off-site
emergency plan;
3. Train personnel involved in chemical accident management;
4. Educate the population likely to be affected in a chemical accident about
the remedies and existing preparedness in the area;
5. Conduct at least one full scale mock- drill of a chemical accident at a site
every six months and forward a report to the District Crisis Group;
6. Respond to all public inquiries on the subject.
(Source–Internet: http://envfor.nic.in/divisions/hsmd/v3.html)

3.1.15 National Legal Services Authority (NALSA):
The National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) has been constituted under the Legal
Services Authorities Act, 1987 to provide free Legal Services to the weaker sections of
the society. The Chief Justice of India is the Patron-in-Chief and the Senior most Hon'ble
Judge, Supreme Court of India is the Executive Chairman of the Authority.
Public awareness, equal opportunity and deliverable justice are the cornerstones
on which the edifice of NALSA is based. The principal objective of NALSA is to provide
free and competent legal services to the weaker sections of the society and to ensure that
opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or
other disabilities, and to organize Lok Adalats for amicable settlement of disputes. Apart
from the abovementioned, functions of NALSA include spreading legal literacy and
awareness, undertaking social justice litigations etc.
With the aim of reaching out to the diverse milieu of people belonging to different
socio-economic, cultural and political backgrounds, NALSA identifies specific categories
of the marginalized and excluded groups from the diverse populace of the country and
formulates various schemes for the implementation of preventive and strategic legal
service programmes to be undertaken and implemented by the Legal Services Authorities
at the various levels. In carrying out all these responsibilities, NALSA works in close
coordination with the various State Legal Services Authorities, District Legal Services
Authorities and other agencies for a regular exchange of relevant information, monitoring
and updating on the implementation and progress of the various schemes in vogue and
fostering a strategic and coordinated approach to ensure smooth and streamlined
functioning of the various agencies and stakeholders.
3.1.16 Odisha State Legal Services Authority (SALSA):
Odisha State Legal Services Authority is a Statutory Body established under the Legal
Services Authorities Act, 1987. Hon’ble Chief Justice of High Court of Odisha is the
Patron-in-Chief of the Odisha Legal Services Authority and the Sr. Judge of the High
Court of Orissa is the Executive Chairman of the Odisha Legal Services Authority. To
look after the legal services pertaining to the High Court, there is High Court Legal
Services Committee, which is chaired by a sitting Judge of the High Court and the
Registrar (Judicial), Orissa High Court is functioning as the Secretary of High Court
Legal Services Committee. The State Legal Services Authority monitors and guides the
District Legal Services Authorities and Taluk Legal Services Committees in achieving the
aims and objectives of the Act. There are 30 District Legal Services Authorities in the
State of Odisha and 81 Taluk Legal Services Committees functioning under them. The

District Legal Services Authorities are headed by District & Sessions Judges. An officer
in the cadre of Senior Civil Judge functions as the Secretary of the District Legal Services
Authority. The Taluk Legal Services Committees are headed by the senior most judicial
officer posted at the station as the Chairman.
The general public who need any legal help / legal aid can directly contact the
concerned Taluk Legal Services Committee / District Legal Services Authority, the High
Court Legal Services Committee and the State Legal Services Authority, as the case may
be, for their legal needs. Added to it, Front Offices have also been established in the
premises of the District Legal Services Authority and Taluk Legal Services Committee
manned by advocate retainers to offer legal advice to the beneficiaries and the general
public as well and also to assist them in different Legal Services Activities.
The State Legal Services Authority has 15 Members which include the Hon’ble
Chairman of High Court Legal Services Committee, Principal Secretaries in the Depts. of
Law and Finance, Director-General and Inspector-General of Police, Advocate General,
District Judges of Cuttack and Khurda at Bhubaneswar. Apart from that the State
Authority has 5 nominated Members namely Hon’ble Minister, Law, Orissa, a Senior
Advocate of Orissa High Court, an M.P., an M.L.A., and an eminent social worker who
have experience in the field of Law, Finance, Social Service or Administration and who
are engaged in the upliftment of the weaker sections of the society, including Schedule
Castes, Schedule Tribes, Women, Children, rural and Urban Labour and who are
interested in the implementation of the Legal Service Schemes.
3.1.17 National Disaster Response Force (NDRF)
The Disaster Management Act 2005 has made the statutory provisions for the constitution
of the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) for the purpose of specialized response
to natural and man-made disasters. The NDRF comprises of 12 units of Central
Paramilitary Forces (CPMF) that includes 3 units each from Central Reserve Police
Forces (CRPF) and Boarder Security Forces (BSF) and 2 Unit each from Central
Industrial Security Forces (CISF), Indian Tibbet Boarder Police (ITBP) and Sahastra
Seema Bal (SSB). Each battalion has 18 self-contained specialists Search and Rescue
teams of 45 personnel. The NDRF team includes Chemical, Biological and Radiological
Disaster (CBRN) emergency responders, S&A element, engineers, technicians,
electricians, dog squads and paramedics. The NDRF battalions are strategically located at
8 different locations in the country based on the vulnerability profile to cut down response

time for their deployment. During the threatening proactive deployment of NDRF is
being carried out by NDMA in consultation with the State Governments.
3.1.18 Odisha Disaster Rapid Action Force (ODRAF)
In the post super cyclone reconstruction and preparedness phase, it was felt necessary to
constitute a professionally trained group equipped with State-of-the-art emergency
equipment to assist the civil administration in search and rescue operation and relief line
clearance for effective management of disasters in the event of natural as well as human
induced disasters. The Government of Odisha formed Odisha Disaster Rapid Action
Force (ODRAF) vide notification no.939/CD dated 07.06.2001. ODRAF is a multidisciplinary, multi-skilled, high-tech force for all types of disasters. ODRAF aims at
reducing casualties, clearance of communication channels, quick deployment of
personnel and equipments and minimize expenditure and time lag and support
institutional arrangement. In 3 phases, ten units of ODRAF have been set up. The
ODRAF units are strategically located throughout Orissa. Locations of these units are
identified on the basis of vulnerability profile to cut down the response time for their
deployment. The ODRAF Units do not have any geographical /territorial restrictions in
terms of area of operation.
Location of ODRAF units in Odisha Figure :3.2

3.2 State Emergency Operation Center (SEOC) and Early
Warning Communication System
3.2.1 State Emergency Operation Center
The State Emergency Operation Centre has been made operational at Rajiv Bhawan,
Bhubaneswar with state of art communication net-work. The State EOC functions round
the clock throughout the year. The Organisation is headed by the Special Relief
Commissioner (SRC) who exercises all administrative and financial powers. He is
assisted by a group of experienced officers and staff. During any natural disaster, the
office functions round the clock in an emergency mode
3.2.2 Warning dissemination protocols:
The warnings received at the state level are communicated to the district Collectors
through telephone / fax / Wireless / E-mail. They in turn communicate the same to the
Gram Panchayats and Villages through Tahsildars and Block Development Officers by
means of telephones, VHF and by person. A four-stage warning system for tropical
cyclones is followed by IMD since, 1999. Firstly, a special bulletin known as “PreCyclone Watch” is issued containing early information about the development of a
cyclonic disturbance in the North Indian Ocean, its likely development into a tropical
cyclone and coastal belt likely to experience adverse weather. Secondly, “Cyclone Alert”
is issued at least 48 hours in advance of the expected commencement of adverse weather
over the coastal areas. Thirdly, “Cyclone Warning” is issued at least 24 hours in
advance. These warnings continue to be issued at 3 hours interval giving the latest
position of the cyclone, its intensity (maximum sustained surface wind speed) and likely
time and point of landfall together with storm surge height and type of damage expected.
Fourthly, “Post Landfall Scenario” is issued to cover the devastating impacts of the
cyclones of inland areas. This commences about 12 hours before landfall and continues
till such time, as the cyclone-force winds are expected to prevail in the interior areas. At
this stage, the district Collectors of all interior districts besides the coastal areas likely to
be affected are included in the bulletin. After the weakening of the cyclone into a
depression stage, a final message on de-warning is issued.
3.2.3 Existing infrastructure for warning dissemination:
State Emergency Operation Centre is functioning in the Office of Special Relief
Commissioner. District Emergency Operation Centres (DEOC) are functioning in the
office of the Collectors under the supervision of a responsible officer. These EOCs have
been provided with fax / telephone and wireless connectivity. Warning messages received

at the districts EOCs are communicated to field level through telephones, civil and police
VHF networks. Satellites phones have also been provided to Collectors of the cyclone
prone districts. Optical fibre telephone lines have been laid down in the coastal areas.
3.2.4 Early Warning Dissemination System (EDWS)
Early Warning Dissemination System (EWDS) for Last Mile Connectivity is one of the
Components (Component-A) of the National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP)
under World Bank assistance. It is implemented in 1205 villages of 22 blocks under 6
coastal districts (Balasore, Bhadrak, Jagatsinghpur, Kendrapara, Puri & Ganjam) within 5
km form coastlines of Odisha. The project aims at establishing a fool-proof
communication system to address the existing gap of disseminating disaster warning up to
the community level especially for cyclone and tsunami. EWDS comprises of technologies
like Satellite Based Mobile Data Voice Terminals (SBMDVT) to be established in State
Emergency Operation Center (SEOC) and six District Emergency Operation Center
(DEOC), Digital Mobile Radio (DMR), Mass Messaging System, Alert Siren System at
122 locations and Universal Communication Interface (UCI) for interoperability among
different communication technologies. People in the coastal areas are being alerted
through these 122 alert siren towers and thereby will be able save their lives and property.
3.3 Coordination and Networking Mechanism
Disaster Management is a multi-agency function. It involves actions by different
departments, organization and agencies. In short, it involves almost all departments of the
State Government, Central Government, Armed Forces, Civil Society, Corporate Sector,
Traders’ Organizations, Faith Based Organizations, International Organizations working
in the field of disaster response and UN Agencies etc. It is therefore, important that 20
roles and responsibilities of each stakeholder are laid down during normal time and
coordination mechanism worked out so that the same works during emergencies. Regular
interaction with all the stakeholders is held at least once in a year. Key stakeholders are
also associated with the mock drills to test their preparedness and clarity of roles and
responsibility.
Coordination and Networking strengthens the disaster preparedness mechanism to
deliver tangible results in a time bound manner. In disaster management, coordination
could be on the basis of information, service, support and institutional framework.
OSDMA works as the focal point for coordinates with different stakeholders for
strengthening the disaster preparedness in the state.

Networking: Information
Information dissemination is a crucial part of disaster management. From early warning
to post disaster need assessment, information could be shared for effective management
of disasters. Close coordination is maintained with the following organisations for
information sharing.
 Odisha Space Application Centre (ORSAC)
 India Meteorological Department (IMD), Bhubaneswar
 Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS)
 National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)
 Regional Integrated Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems (RIMES)
 Erath Networks
Networking: Service
For service sector, networking with the following institutions is made:
 National Institute of Disaster Management
 National Disaster Response Force
 Indian Institute of Technology, Bhubaneswar
 Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, (Bhubaneswar centre)
 Naba Krushna Choudhury Centre for Development Studies (NKCCDS)
 Xavier Institute of Management (XIMB), Bhubaneswar
Networking: Support
 Defense/Armed Forces (Army, Navy and Air Force)
 NDRF
 Railways
 Fire Service
 Large industrial houses
 Medical Colleges & hospitals
 Multilateral and Bilateral institutions
 Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
3.4 Ongoing Projects-Prevention and Mitigation Activities
Today, there is a paradigm shift in the approach to disaster management from a culture of
relief and rehabilitation to that of preparedness and mitigation. Effective mitigation
requires that we all understand local risks, address the hard choices, and invest in longterm community well-being. Without mitigation actions, we jeopardize our safety,
financial security and self-reliance.

In the face of increasing menace of various hazards, mitigation would remain the key
and the most effective strategy to reduce the risks of various hazards. Structural
mitigation measures generally refer to capital investment on physical constructions or
other development works, which include engineering measures and construction of hazard
resistant and protective structures and other protective infrastructure.
Non-structural mitigation measures refer to awareness and education, policies,
techno-legal systems and practices, training, capacity development, public commitment,
and methods and operating practices, including participatory mechanisms, and the
provision of information, which can reduce risk with related impacts.
3.4.1 Prevention and Mitigation Activities of different departments Table:3.1
Sl.
No.
Departments/Directorate Structural Measures Non-structural Measures
1. Animal Husbandry and
Veterinary Services
1. Construction of community
shelters for rehabilitation of
livestock in the flood affected
area.
2. The size of the shelter may be
100ft x 30 ft. usually in an
ideal situation 60 sq ft space
for an adult cow.
3. For emergency shake, at least
2 cows can be kept in that
prescribed amount of space. In
that respect, required numbers
of shelters of 100 x 30 ft size
can be constructed in each
village of the vulnerable
pockets for flood, during
emergency 10-15 animal can
be accommodated in a single
shed.
1. Surveillance mechanism
involving state, district
and village level
veterinary institutions for
early detection of
outbreaks. Chief
Veterinary Officers at
district level to report to
state level control room
on monthly basis.
2. Identification of Nodal
Officers at state, district
and village level for
coordination of activities.
3. Coordination with
revenue department for
provision of temporary
shelters for animals at
identified shelter sites
with provision for proper
water and fodder.
4. Provision of vehicles for
immediate transportation
of infected animals to
veterinary hospitals.
5. Preparedness plan for
each veterinary hospital
for handling the inflow of
infected animals.
6. Stock of required
medicines and
equipment.

2. Health & Family Welfare All public buildings like,
hospitals and health centres to
be multi hazard resilient, built
on raised grounds and platforms
with retrofitting and having
adequate exit gates and fire
extinguishers in place.
1. Health Worker (M &
F), Supervisors (M &
F), PHEIO, Medical
Officer should resort
to Inter personal comm
unication to propagate
the messages as this is
the most effective
media with maximum
reach. During field
visit group discussions
can be initiated &
emphasis should be
given on preventive
aspect.
2. Signage in respect of
Do’s & Don’ts of Heat
Stroke need to be
displayed in the
strategic
Places.
3. Leaf lets to be
distributed & Poster
displayed at strategic
places of people.
4. IEC campaign through
print & electronic
media to be conducted
through Deptt. of SIH
& FW.
3. MSME 1. Multi-Purpose community
shelters to be constructed in
flood prone / cyclone prone
areas.
2. Designing & construction of
robust sheds for MSMEs to
withstand disasters like
Earthquake, Cyclone or,
Floods.
1. Awareness Creation
for availing Insurance
Policy, Coverage
under CGTMSE
scheme of GoI.
2. Awareness Creation
for disaster proof
MSME sheds.

4. Excise 1.Fire safety measures have
been taken in the
depots/Distilleries. Grant of
licence is not made unless the
application comes with fire
safety certificate from
competent authority.
2.Destruction of Hemp plant on
regular basis by the
Enforcement Squad of Excise
Department from time to time,
in those districts where Hemp
Plantations are being carried
on.
3.Construction of new Excise
Station/ Hazat & Malkhana
has been taken up in phased
manner.
1. Mass awareness and
sensitizations
programmes are
conducted out of funds
of OSBC to highlight
the disastrous
consequences of
consumption of
spurious liquor and the
hazards it poses for
health, safety and life
of consumers.
2. All the Godowns are
insured taking the stock
value of 31st December
of previous year and
the Insurance covers
the standard fire risk
and other perils such as
storm, cyclone,
typhoon, tempest
hurricanes, tornado,
flood, inundation and
RSMD, Earth quake,
burglary, house
breaking, theft,
pilferage explosion and
implosion etc. Such
coverage of insurance
begins w.e.f. each
financial year.

5 Factories and Boilers 1. Formation of District
Crisis Group (DCG) /
Local Crisis Group
(LCG), convening
meetings & publication
of Annual Activity
Report thereof.
2. Assessment of On-Site
Emergency Plans &
verification of
Dispersion Modeling.
3. Awareness of General
Public living in the
vicinity of the MAH
factories.
4. Conduct of Off-Site
Emergency Mock
Drills.
5. Preparation of
Departmental Disaster
Management Plan.
6 ST & SC 1. Awareness generation
among students of the
educational institutions.
2. Guidelines/ circulars
and manual on chain of
command and
communication with
regard to disaster
prevention &
preparedness actions.
3. Ensuring establishment
and functioning of
control room at the
department level.
4. Integration of disaster
preparedness activities
in the on-going
development plans and
projects.
5. Mapping of necessary
resources/ equipments
for undertaking
prevention/ rescue

operations and
identifying gaps
therein.
6. Yearly assessment of
physical infrastructures
and safety measures
available.
7. Panchayati Raj and
Drinking Water
MGNREGA
1. Utilization of MGNREGS
funds to reduce the
vulnerability of Panchayat vis
a vis natural hazards such as
landslide, drought, forest fire,
cloud burst, flash floods,
earthquake etc
GGY/CC Road
1. The Master Plan should be
prepared in such a way that it
should connect the vulnerable
habitations.
2. The technical guidelines
should explicitly provide for
suitable protection and
inclusion of disaster risks.
8. W&CD 1. Capacity building at all
level in vulnerable
areas of flood/cyclone.
2. Public awareness
through IEC activities
and display of DM
plans in all AWCs and
Institutions.
3. Prepositioning of
supplies and
demarcation of areas
and spaces where
temporary services can
be provided.
9. Works 1. Construction of storage
reservoir, detention tank,
raising leaves, digging of
silted channels and dredging
of sea mouth, slope protection
etc. are generally executed for
1. For flood forecasting
the department has
established 56
standard rain gauge
stations under
Hydrology Project

flood protection.
2. The raising of the
embankments, slope
protection, channels
excavation, mouth clearance
to sea etc. works are also
being carried out every year
and before starting of the
monsoon season.
(HP) and 34 non-HP
stations. There are 12
Automated Rain
Gauges, 44 Gauge
Discharge sites, 12
water level recorder
and 9 full climate
stations also have been
established in ten river
basins of the state.
Beside that 20
sedimentations
laboratories, 11 water
quality and
sedimentation
laboratories are also
established on the
basins.
2. Round the clock
(24x7) running flood
cell disseminates the
flood information to
all the recipient
bodies. The flood
information is updated
in the
site http://www.dowro
rissa.gov.in every day
during a period from

st June to 31st
October.
(Source: Departmental Disaster Management Plans of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary
Services, Health & Family Welfare, MSME, Excise, Director of Factories & Boilers,
ST&SC, Panchayati Raj and Drinking Water, W&CD, Works)
3.5 Long term strategic planning as per Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction (SFDRR) guidelines
The Hyogo Framework for Action has provided a blue print for disaster risk reduction
activities including promotion of culture of prevention, mitigation, preparedness and
resilience at all levels. Since then, considerable progress has been made by investing
resources and enhancing capacities in dealing with the disasters. However, much needs to
be done in the future. The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 has
provided with people-centered preventive approach to disaster risk. This would contribute

to the reduction of disaster risks and strengthen resilience of the poor and the most
vulnerable. Mainstreaming disaster risk reduction in development programmes and
community resilience building are some of the noteworthy features.
Recent events in India such as the landslides and floods of 2013 in Uttarakhand,
cyclone ‘Phailin’ in Odisha in 2013, the floods and landslides in Jammu & Kashmir,
cyclone ‘Hudhud’ in Andhra Pradesh in 2014, Typhoon ‘Haiyan’ in Philippines in 2014,
Ludian and Yutian Earthquakes in China in 2014 have once again brought into focus the
need for multiplying the efforts towards disaster risk reduction not only in India but also
globally. The unplanned development of cities and lack of proper infrastructure are the
major challenges of the future. While communities, exposed to these events, are trying to
adapt to these conditions, the economic and social costs continue to mount. India has done a
lot towards DRR system development with the passage of Disaster Management Act,
Disaster Management Policy, establishment of Authorities at National, State and District
levels, NIDM for capacity building and NDRF as a dedicated response force. NIDM also
houses SDMC which caters to capacity building of stakeholders in South Asia region.
With the above statement in Third World Conference on DRR at Sendai, Japan in
March 2015, Hon’ble Union Home Minister, Government of India has not only raised
various issues faced by the country concerning DRR but also has highlighted the initiatives
taken by India in the sphere of DRR. The Sendai Conference has agreed to achieve seven
targets as indicated below. It was envisaged to develop indicators to achieve these targets
by all Member States. The seven targets to be achieved are:
 Substantially reduce global disaster mortality by 2030, aiming to lower average per
100,000 global mortality between 2020-2030 compared to 2005-2015;
 Substantially reduce the number of affected people globally by 2030, aiming to
lower the average global figure per 100,000 between 2020-2030 compared to 2005-
2015;
 Reduce direct disaster economic loss in relation to global gross domestic product
(GDP) by 2030;
 Substantially reduce disaster damage to critical infrastructure and disruption of
basic services, among them health and educational facilities, including through
developing their resilience by 2030;
 Substantially increase the number of countries with national and local disaster risk
reduction strategies by 2020;

 Substantially enhance international cooperation to developing countries through
adequate and sustainable support to complement their national actions for
implementation of this framework by 2030; and
 Substantially increase the availability of and access to multi-hazard early warning
systems and disaster risk information and assessments to the people by 2030.
In this context implementation of SFDRR in the State of Odisha requires long term
planning. The SFA is a broad framework which provides 7 targets and 4 priorities area
along with action points for each. To ensure that SFA’s 4 priority areas and recommended
action points are to be interpreted and contextualized in accordance with local realities and
priorities of Odisha. The first draft of SFDRR Road Map for the State of Odisha has been
prepared and now it is under the process of finalizations. 5 Regional level consultation were
organized involving all the key stakeholders and their suggestions has been incorporated in
the SFDRR Road Maps.
Implementation of Sendai Frame Work in Odisha context Table: 3.2
Sl
No.
Priorities for Action Activities to be done
1. Understanding Disaster Risk:
This priority encompasses all actions
needed to ensure that policies and
practices for disaster risk management
are informed by an understanding of
disaster risks in all its dimensionsvulnerability, capacity, exposure of
persons and assets, hazard
characteristics and the environment.
a) Creating Disaster Damage Data base at
the Block and District level
b) Building the knowledge of government
officials, civil society, communities
and volunteers, as well as the private
sector. Organizing sensitization
meetings and awareness programmes
at the community level.
c) Promoting the incorporation of disaster
risk knowledge, including disaster
prevention, mitigation, preparedness,
response, recovery and rehabilitation,
in formal and non-formal education,
d) Enhancing collaboration among people
at the local level to disseminate
disaster risk information through the
involvement of community-based
organizations and non-governmental
organizations.

2 Strengthening Disaster Risk
Governance to manage disaster risk
This priority builds on the guiding
principle that governments have the
primary responsibility of preventing
and reducing risks. It encompasses all
the actions necessary at different
levels of governance (state, district,
blocks/circles and local governance
and institutions), including policies,
plans, systems, mechanisms, capacity
enhancement and coordination to
manage disaster risks.
a) Strengthening local level resilience
through enhanced role of local
institutions (PRIs, ULBs) and
communities in DRR.
b) Urban local bodies and the Panchayats
to follow building bye-laws.
c) Effective system and procedure for
quality monitoring and accountability.
d) Identify flood prone/earthquake prone
areas - future construction of buildings
to be earthquake proof and flood
resilient
3 Investing in Disaster Risk Reduction
for Resilience
This priority builds on the principal
that addressing underlying disaster
risk factors through disaster riskinformed public and private
investments are more cost-effective
than primary reliance on post-disaster
response and recovery, and contribute
to the sustainable development.
a) 10% of all funds at the District level
must be devoted to schemes which will
help in DRR
b) Sensitize Private builders about the
need for disaster resilient building
construction.
c) Train masons/contractors on disaster
resilient building construction.
4 Enhancing Disaster Preparedness
for effective Response
This priority takes into consideration
the facts that while we need to broaden
disaster risk reduction actions from
only preparedness and response, 1)
there is still a lot to be done for
strengthening preparedness for
response, 2) creation of new risks
necessitates preparedness for newer
types of response and,3) recovery,
rehabilitation and reconstruction
processes offer actions needed to
ensure same
a) Regular meetings of DDMAs (once in
3 months) even if there is no calamity
and discuss preparedness
b) Meetings with the Forecasting
Agencies like IMD during the
monsoons
c) Prepare Standard Drill for
responding to Cyclone/Flood/Tsunami
etc.
d) Prepare for heat wave in summers and
cold wave in winters as applicable.
e) Conduct regular drills involving the
Police, Civil Defence and Fire
Services.
f) Impart training to village level workers
to promote disaster sensitivity.

Chapter IV
Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction
and Climate Change Adaptations in
Development Planning
4.1 Mainstreaming DRR and CCA:
“Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) is the concept and practice of reducing disaster risks
through systematic efforts to analyse and manage the causal factors of disasters, including
through reduced exposure to hazards, lessened vulnerability of people and property, wise
management of land and the environment, and improved preparedness for adverse
events.”
“Climate Change Adaptation (CCA) is the adjustment in natural or human systems in
response to actual or expected climate stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or
exploits beneficial opportunities.”
Link between DRR and CCA
Devising appropriate policy for “Sustainable development” by factoring disaster risk
concerns can help reduce disaster losses, protect existing development gains and avoid
new risks. CCA and DRR, while not the same, have significant overlaps, including their
need for mainstreaming into broader development. DRR and climate change mitigation
and adaptation share common goals; both aim to reduce the vulnerability of communities
and achieve sustainable development. While emphasis of DRR is on prevention,
mitigation, preparedness and recovery from geological hazards such as earthquakes,
landslides etc. as well as hydro-meteorological disasters such as floods, cyclones, CCA is
mainly linked with hydro-meteorological disasters and aims at reducing vulnerability due
to climate change/variability risk through adaptation to gradual changes in climate over a
long period.

Figure:4.1
Mainstreaming DRR and CCA:
Can be defined as “considering and addressing risks associated with disasters and climate
change in all processes of policy-making, planning, budgeting, implementation, and
monitoring.” This entails an analysis of how potential risks and vulnerability could affect
the implementation of policies, programmes and projects. Concurrently, it also analyses
how these, in turn, could have an impact on vulnerability to hazards. This analysis should
lead on to the adoption of appropriate measures to reduce potential risks and
vulnerability, where necessary, treating risk reduction and adaptation as an integral part of
all programme management processes rather than as an end in itself.
Mainstreaming DRR involves incorporating disaster risk reduction into development
policy and practice. It means radically expanding and enhancing disaster risk reduction so
that it becomes normal practice, fully institutionalized within an agency’s relief and
development agenda.
Mainstreaming has three purposes:
i. To make certain that all the development programmes and projects are designed
with evident consideration for potential disaster risks and to resist hazard impact.

ii. To make certain that all the development programmes and projects do not
inadvertently increase vulnerability to disaster in all sectors: social, physical,
economic and environment.
iii. To make certain that all the disaster relief and rehabilitation programmes and
projects are designed to contribute to developmental aims and to reduce future
disaster risk.
Procedure/ Methodology for Mainstreaming of DRR and CCA in Development
Planning:
Project appraisal: Consideration of disaster risk concerns as part of the project appraisal
process is an essential step in:
• ensuring that development gains from individual projects are sustainable;
• ensuring that potential disaster risk reduction benefits of both dedicated risk
reduction projects and other development projects are optimised; and
• highlighting related issues of responsibility and accountability.
Disaster risk concerns should be considered in all components of project appraisal
analysis – financial, economic, environmental, social, institutional and technical –
reflecting the fact that vulnerability to natural hazards is complex and multi-faceted and
so needs to be viewed from all angles, incorporated into broader planning tools, such as
logical framework analysis and results-based management frameworks, and reflected in
the development of monitoring and evaluation indicators.
Monitoring and evaluation of projects from DRR/CCA angle:
The capacity to monitor and evaluate DRR initiatives, generate hard evidence on related
inputs, outputs, results and impacts and learn lessons for the future is an essential
component for mainstreaming. DRR initiatives can and should be monitored and
evaluated. Problems relating, for instance, to potentially lengthy time lags in the
realisation of benefits can be overcome to some extent by using leading or process
indicators that provide a measure of progress towards the achievement of project
objectives (e.g., the number of schools constructed to withstand earthquakes of a
particular magnitude).

Few key actions for mainstreaming of DRR and CCA in development planning
• Adequate budget, dedicated staff, capacity development, a monitoring framework, and
interdepartmental cooperation need to be in place for effective mainstreaming.
• More attention needs to be paid to the monitoring and measuring of mainstreaming. This
should include an assessment of inclusion of gender issues and Below Poverty Line
families in climate change planning.
• Risk diversification in the context of unpredictable climate patterns is necessary.
The options need to include effective programmes of contingency crop planning, crop
diversification including the use of hazard resistant crops as well as promoting
supplementary income generation from off-farm and non-farm activities.
• The main obstacle in the path of government departments being able to address climate
change concerns is dedicated personnel. Officials need to be highly skilled and trained.
Additional qualities that an official needs to have in order to function effectively include
empathy and communication.
• Detailed procedures that list the precise steps that are to be implemented in case of an
emergency and by whom need to be put into place. This will ensure that systems work
irrespective of the calibre of the individual official in position at that time.
• Preparation for a disaster as well as risk reduction should be incorporated into school
and college curricula. This step will ensure that citizens who are usually the first on the
scene of a disaster are well-equipped to deal with emergencies and also reduce
dependence on the NDRF and ODRAF.
Mainstreaming DRR into the developmental plans is an important mandate of the
Disaster Management Act 2005. Integration of disaster risk reduction measures into
ongoing flagship programmes is being used as an entry point for mainstreaming DRR in
development plans. Steps for ensuring the incorporation of DRR into various ongoing
programmes\plans are as follows:
(a) Identification of key programme /projects.
(b) Identification of entry points within the programme for integration of DRR
(structural, nonstructural and other mitigation measures) at various levels viz.
state, district and local levels

(c) Close coordination with concerned departments such as State Planning
Commission/ body and Finance Department for promoting DRR measures into
development plans and policies
(d) Allocation of dedicated budget for DRR within the departmental plans.
(e) Preparation of guidelines for integration of disaster risk reduction measures into
development plans of the department at the district and sub-district level.
(f) Review & Incorporation of DRR provisions in the policies, rules & regulations
Some of the below mentioned flagship programmes could be used as an entry point for
mainstreaming of DRR and CCA in development plans and the following steps may be
under taken.
i. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme (MGNREGS)
The Scheme seeks to provide social protection for the most vulnerable, livelihood
security for the poor through creation of durable assets, improved water security, soil
conservation and higher land productivity, drought-proofing and flood management in
rural India.
Utilization of MGNREGS funds to reduce the vulnerability of Panchayat
against natural hazards such as floods, droughts, landslide etc. should be given priority.
While identifying MGNREGS works, the hazard profile of the area should be taken into
account. The plan for offering continuous employment opportunities in the event of
disasters must be taken into account to ensure livelihood security in the event of
disasters.
 Expand and strengthen drought proofing activities;
 Notify the areas within villages liable to threat/damage from natural hazards such
as river incursion/erosion;
 Identify locations within the villages and prepare a list of appropriate works that
could be undertaken to mitigate disaster and climate risks in the vulnerable
locations as per HRVA;
 Prepare a list of work related to creation as well as strengthening of flood
protection structures within the villages/Panchayat;
 Undertake works related to removal of river siltation.
 Undertake plantation works for preventing river erosion/incursion as well as
landslide mitigation;
 Create structures to regulate flow of rainwater.

 Give priority to disaster mitigation works under the scheme which address hazards
like flood, river erosion among others;
 Develop a checklist for the Gram Sabha on safe construction of various
community assets/structures under the Scheme;
 Introduce mechanism of passing resolutions by Sarpanch in Gram Panchayat for
disaster preparedness;
 Develop convergence strategy for DRR & CCA integration into programmes
being implemented with the help of government as well as private funds;
 Undertake awareness for PRIs and community members on safe development;
ii. Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana- Gramin
PMAY- Gramin aims at providing pucca house, with basic amenities, to all houseless
households and those households living in kutcha and dilapidated house, by 2022. The
immediate objective is to cover 1.00 crore households living in kutcha house/dilapidated
houses in three years from 2016-17 to 2018-2019
Inclusion of such measures like application of hazard resistant design in
construction of PMAY (G) houses, appropriate sitting of PMAY (G) housing,
development of model design for PMAY (G) houses, capacity building of rural
masons on safe construction, capacity building of PRIs and community awareness are
some of key actions to be taken under the Scheme.
 Design and popularize low cost multi- hazard resistant housing designs;
 Train masons and construction workers in multi- hazard-resistant construction
practices;
 Demonstrate technology and designs for low-cost, eco-friendly and hazard
resistant housing;
 Formulate a Panchayat level convergence plan and facilitate a joint platform for
programmes pertaining to housing, water and sanitation, and rural roads, among
others;
 Establish hubs that supply material required for green houses;
 Organize orientation programmes for beneficiaries/owners;
 Build capacity of Village/Panchayat level functionaries, PRI representatives,
community- level resource persons;
 Put in place a mechanism to promote convergence of schemes for synergy and
optimal utilization of resources;
 Motivate beneficiaries to put additional funds for incorporating hazard-resistant
features;
 Develop and implement a strategy to create awareness about disaster risks and
produce as well as disseminate appropriate IEC materials.
 Use the flexi fund to incorporate risk reduction features;
 Training of engineers and DRDA officials on safe rural housing;

iii. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
The Scheme seeks to connect villages by all weather roads by consolidating the rural road
network. Roads are lifelines and must be functional in post disaster phase.
 Identify habitations that tend to get cut off during heavy rains as part of the village
HRVA to prioritize build connecting roads to such habitations, with adequate
safety measures.
 Villages that are vulnerable and lack road connectivity should be given preference
over others;
 Give preference to establish road connectivity for critical facilities such as
primary health centers (PHCs), schools and panchayat offices within the villages;
 Keeping in view the hazard proneness of the villages, roads construction under
PMGSY must meet the technical specifications and geometric design standards
given in the Rural Roads Manual of the Indian Roads Congress (IRC:SP20:2002)
and the Hill Roads Manual (IRC:SP:48);
 Road design and surface for villages should consider soil type and rainfall as well
as by the technical specifications laid down in the Rural Roads Manual (IRC:
SP20:2002).
 Road for villages should be designed preferably as a cement road or with paved
stones, besides being provided with appropriate side drains and cross drainage so
that improper drainage does not damage the road or the dwelling units alongside;
 While approving road construction, additional provision should be made for
hazards such as floods, landslides etc;
 Training of departmental officials and relevant stakeholders to ensure DRR
integration while building rural roads under the programme;
 Village/Panchayat level functionaries, PRI representatives and community- level
resource persons should be oriented on DRR
 Districts should formulate a plan at the block and GP level to bring convergence
of the PMGSY with the MGNREGS and other schemes.
iv. National Health Mission (NHM)
The Mission seeks to attain universal access to equitable, affordable, and quality
healthcare services, accountable and responsive to people’s needs, with effective intersectoral convergent action to address the wider determinants of health.
Reaching health facilities in remote areas is a big challenge particularly in post disaster
phase when infrastructure and connectivity would be down. Adequate capacity needs to
be created at the local level.

 Undertake disaster mitigation measures for PHCs in the villages with focus on
retrofitting, non-structural mitigation and medical emergency preparedness
planning and training;
 Establish linkages with telemedicine to reach out to villages/households that are
difficult to access;
 Ensure that all health facilities to be created in future are able to withstand disaster
risks specific to their locations;
 Ensure training on structural safety for engineers and masons involved in
execution of projects under the programme.
 Village Health Plan and the District Health plan should address the disaster risk
reduction concerns in the vulnerable districts;
 Prepare Health Disaster Preparedness and Response Plan with focus on the
training of PHC staff, ASHA Workers and ANMs;
 Formulate emergency response plan for health facilities being created under the
programme;
 Prepare training module on disaster management for PHC staff, ASHA Workers,
and ANMs;
 Impart training to PHC staff, community workers such as ASHA, ANMs and
community members on first aid and emergency health response;
 Put in a mechanism for surveillance, detection and reporting outbreaks of diseases
and issuing alerts and response tracking;
 Prepare IEC material showing the links between health aspects and DRR & CCA
and create awareness among the community by dissemination of IEC material
through community-level workers.
v. Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA)
The Scheme seeks to attain Universal Elementary Education (UEE) in the country in a
mission mode by ensuring that all children complete five years of primary schooling and
eight years of elementary schooling of satisfactory quality.
Schools are key public assets and must be protected from known hazard risks as they play
critical role in post-disaster phase. Assessment of structural and non-structural elements
of schools buildings, undertaking vulnerability assessment and training & capacity
building of school functionaries, parents, teachers, students and non-teaching staff etc.
must be inculcated.
 Undertake disaster mitigation measures for schools in the villages with focus on
retrofitting, non-structural mitigation and medical emergency preparedness
planning and training;
 Undertake Structural & Non-structural Safety Audit of Schools and develop
School Safety Plan
 Undertake structural and non-structural risk reduction/mitigation measures

 Undertake retrofitting of existing schools and provide for drinking water and
sanitation.
 New school buildings to be constructed under the programme in future should
ensure structural safety and demonstrate multi-hazard resistant design and
construction to serve as a model for similar buildings in the area;
 Focus on the use of low cost and environment friendly construction material that
is locally available;
 Designate school buildings for providing shelter during emergency situations.
Ensure necessary facilities are built in to cater support to the evacuated.
 Give priority to seismic safety, the safety of boundary walls and furniture &
fittings in the schools;
 Give emphasis on micro planning for school development at the village or village
cluster level, with the formation of a core group comprising of teachers and
parents, community leaders and NGOs;
 Undertake functional training of teachers and other stakeholders (PRI Members)
involved in managing the school;
 Constitute Core Committee at village/panchayat level to oversee school safety and
preparedness;
 Formulate and implement a School Disaster Management Plan and conduct
preparedness drills;
 Prepare training modules on School Safety to train School Management
Committee members, teachers and core committee members;
 Conduct specific trainings on school safety and management;
 Undertake training of children and school staff in basic first-aid, selected search
and rescue methods;
 Organize rally and education programmes to raise awareness;
 Encourage student volunteers to participate in DRR activities;
 Undertake annual mock drill on fire, flood, and earthquake safety.
vi. Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY)
The Scheme seeks to incentivize the states to increase public investment in agriculture
and allied sectors to ensure that local needs/crops/priorities are better reflected in the
agricultural plans of states.
Agriculture is one of the key sectors affected by natural hazards which enhance
vulnerabilities of farmers and often threaten their livelihood. Exposure to and losses
resulting from climate induced disasters are increasing worldwide, affecting peoples’
livelihoods and food security.
Preserving the natural resources and ecosystem against hazard risks and long-term
climate variability would be key for rural communities. Uneven distribution of rainfall,
occurrence of floods and dry spells, lack of infrastructure, difficulties associated with
hilly terrains, poor economic status of farmers, very small land holdings, depletion of soil

nutrients, massive soil erosion due to high intensity rainfall events, lack of post harvesting
facilities and marketing infrastructures are some of the challenges in villages.
Providing technological know-how to the farming community through agricultural
extension services and educating farmers on soil and water conservation technologies and
equipping them with knowledge and skills to deal with disaster and climate risk is the
need of the hour. Undertaking skill up-gradation of farmers, generating awareness on
hazards, establishing early warning mechanisms to gather information related to impeding
floods, droughts or pest attacks etc. should be key interventions.
 Undertake construction of bunds along arable lands of villages to prevent river
ingression and soil erosion;
 Undertake locally appropriate solutions such as the construction of check dams/
minor irrigation tanks to regulate flow of rain water;
 Establishing storage and accessibility for quality/ hazard-resistant seeds;
Undertake extension activities for training farmers;
 Set up mechanism for integrated pest management;
 Advise farmers on various agricultural issues free of cost in the local language.
 Impart training of farmers and for the creation of grain and seed banks;
 Create awareness about the likely impacts of climate change and adaptation
measures;
 Involve community facilitators who can motivate farmers to use various
technological innovations and appropriate practices;
 Strengthen market linkages to ensure remunerative prices to farmers;
 Establish a mechanism to track changes in weather patterns and their impact on
agriculture, document and disseminate among farmers.
 Promote crop insurance for farmers.
 Establish a coordination mechanism with other departments that have an
agricultural focus such as the irrigation department.
 Set up/ strengthen networks for transfer of knowhow from the laboratory to the
field.
 A number of action research projects exploring varieties of flood and salinity –
resistant seeds should be undertaken.
vii. National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP)
The Programme seeks to provide safe and adequate drinking water for all, at all times for
drinking, cooking and other basic needs on a sustainable basis in rural India. Though
water may be available, but quality of water could be an issue during post disaster phase.
 All drinking water facilities coming up under the programme should be hazard
resistant.
 Safety of drinking water facilities and their operability in the event of disasters
(for example; erection of hand pumps/ bore wells at the height above the highest

flood level) should be made a key consideration for appraisal of the proposals
under the programme.
 Identify terrains that are vulnerable to flooding or drought or pose special
challenges such as high fluoride content and develop appropriate solutions and
designs.
 Identify areas with acute water scarcity on a regular basis or on a seasonal basis
and design immediate as well as permanent solutions.
 Design and promote appropriate water conservation practices in locations facing
an acute water scarcity.
 Ensure the use of appropriate technology to count, track and monitor the drinking
water facilities created under the programme
 Assess drinking water challenges during disasters for the villages and provide
solutions;
 Establish low-cost water treatment plants at the GP level;
 Create reliable drinking water facilities under the programme;
 Take measures to ensure sustainability of the water supply infrastructure;
 Take actions in convergence with sanitation programmes;
 Involve NGOs, CSOs and ASHA workers for addressing challenges of drinking
water in post disaster phase.
viii. Swachh Bharat Mission (SBA)
The Scheme seeks to accomplish the vision of clean India by 2019 by eliminating open
defecation and changing people’s attitudes to sanitation and create awareness.
1) Based on the sanitation and hygiene practices of the villages/panchayat, organize
the orientation of key personnel
2) Prepare a village/Gram Panchayat Plan and IEC activities under the scheme;
3) Design and promote toilet models and sanitation infrastructure suited to local geoclimatic conditions;
4) Provide proper sanitation facilities in schools and community centers;
5) Encourage cost-effective and appropriate technologies for ecologically sustainable
sanitation;
6) Develop community-managed solid and liquid waste management for overall
cleanliness in villages;
7) Involve community-level staff such as teachers, ASHA and Anganwadi workers
to motivate the community to adopt sanitation facilities;
8) Motivate PRIs and communities to provide sustainable sanitation facilities
through awareness creation and health education;
9) Undertake capacity building of field-level staff including school teachers, ASHA
and Anganwadi workers, NGOs and Community-based Organizations (CBOs)
connected with toilet construction.
10) Develop appropriate sanitation strategies for disaster situations and include this in
the Village/Gram Panchayat Disaster Management Plan.

4.1.1. GOI- UNDP Project on Enhancing Institutional and Community
Resilience to Disasters and Climate Change (2013- 2017):
The GOI- UNDP project on “Enhancing Institutional and Community Resilience to
Disasters and Climate Change (2013-2017)” aims to build capacities at different level to
integrate disaster risk reduction concerns and climate change adaptation measures in
development activities. In Odisha, the project is being implemented in 3 targeted districts
viz. Puri, Ganjam and Kendrapada and two cities; Bhubaneswar and Cuttack.
Under the community resilience component of the project, which covers around
1000 villages in three project districts, training programmes are being organised for
members of PRIs and CSMMCs & FSMMCs to make them understand CCA and DRR
concerns at the local level and to equip them with knowledge and skills for assessing,
delineating strategies and delivering their roles in relation to the risk mitigation/
prevention and implementation of effective response to extreme events. So far 550
participants from 119 Gram Panchayats and 210 Cyclone/ Flood shelters of the project
districts have been trained on mainstreaming DRR and CCA in local level planning and
development programmes.
Training workshops are also being organized for members of District Planning
Committees (DPCs) and other officials of the district administration on Mainstreaming
DRR and CCA into district level planning. The objectives of these workshops are to
orient the members of District Planning Committees (DPCs) and other officials of the
district administration on concept, practices and procedure for mainstreaming DRR and
CCA into developmental planning. During 2016, training programmes at DPMU level of
all the three projects districts have been completed and draft action plans has been
developed for sectors like agriculture, livelihood, water & sanitation, housing and
infrastructure.
The project through its several activities created a sense of understanding and acceptance
for Climate Change Adaptation as well as mainstreaming of DRR among the decision
makers. The plan is to replicate the experiences gained from the programme throughout
the state in coming years.
4.2 Do No Harm Approach: It indicates strategies and programmes to
build disaster and climate resilience incorporating assessment of potential negative

impacts, including effects on the environment. In cases where potential harm is identified,
measures to substantially reduce or remove them should be built into the strategy and
program design. To avoid creating a false sense of security, or promoting mal-adaptation,
programs should always be based on a multi-hazard, multi-effect assessment.
The mitigation projects taken up in the state for building resilience are guided by Do No Harm
Approach. Steps are being taken to ensure that all programmes with a potential for
causing a negative impact on the environment are properly assessed prior to
implementation or, if they already exist, that they are screened for any negative
environmental impacts. There is active consideration for the environmental impacts of all
post-disaster reconstruction. “Building back better” means ensuring that responses do not
negatively impact the environment and natural resources upon which people depend.
Reducing vulnerability, strengthening resilience: Consider the potential impacts of
interventions on social dynamics and give preference to the interventions that effectively
meet current needs and build longer term resilience.
Disaster preparedness: Consider the potential impacts of interventions on local
communities’ increased dependence on external support.
Disaster response: Provide relief assistance in a way that helps meet the immediate
needs of affected people and, at the same time, build their longer-term resilience to future
disasters.
Recovery: Ensure that recovery programming does no harm either socially, economically
or environmentally. Analyse proposed interventions in terms of their potential impact on
disaster and climate change risk (current and future) and to make the results available to
affected and at-risk populations.
4.3 The Legal Context:
The statutory provisions of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 for mainstreaming
Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) are mentioned below.
i. Section 18 (2) (d) provides that the SDMA may lay down guidelines to be
followed by the departments of the Government of the State for the purposes of
integration of measures for prevention of disasters and mitigation in their
development plans and projects and provide necessary technical assistance
therefore;

ii. Section18 (2) (g) provides that the SDMA may review the development plans of
the different departments of the State and ensure that prevention and mitigation
measures are integrated therein;
iii. Section 23 (4) (c) provides that the State Plan shall include the manner in which
the mitigation measures shall be integrated with the development plans and
projects;
iv. Section 30 (2) (viii) provides that the DDMA may lay down guidelines to be
followed by the Departments of the Government at the district level for purposes
of integration of measures for prevention of disasters and mitigation in their
development plans and projects and provide necessary technical assistance
therefore;
v. Section 30 (2) ( xxii) provides that the DDMA may review development plans
prepared by the Departments of the Government at the district level, statutory
authorities or local authorities with a view to make necessary provisions therein
for prevention of disaster or mitigation;
vi. Section 35 (2) (b) provides that the Central Government may ensure the
integration of measures for prevention of disasters and mitigation by Ministries or
Departments of the Government of India into their development plan and projects;
vii. Section 36 (b) provides that every Ministry/ Department of Government of India
shall integrate into its development plans and projects, the measures for prevention
or mitigation of disasters in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the
National Authority;
viii. Section 38 (2) (e) provides that the State Government may ensure integration of
measures for prevention of disaster or mitigation by the departments of the
Government of the State in their development plans and projects;
ix. Section 38 (2) (f) provides that the State Government may integrate in the state
development plan, measures to reduce or mitigate the vulnerability of different
parts of the State to different disasters;
x. Section 39 (b) provides that it shall be the responsibility of every department of
the Government of a State to integrate into its development plans and projects, the
measures for prevention of disaster and mitigation;
xi. Section 39 (e) provides that it shall be the responsibility of every department of
the Government of a State to review the enactments administered by it, its
policies, rules and regulations with a view to incorporate therein the provisions
necessary for prevention of disasters, mitigation or preparedness;
xii. Section 40 (1) (a) (iii) mandates every Department of the State Government to
prepare a disaster management plan which shall lay down the integration of

strategies for the prevention of disaster or the mitigation of its effects or both with
the development plan and programmes by the department;
4.4 Financial Provisions:
4.4.1 Flexi- Funds as a part of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS):
The Flexi- Funds component within Centrally Sponsored Schemes was first introduced in
2014 by the Ministry of Finance vides its O.M. No. 55(5)/PF-II/2011 dated 06.01.2014 to
insist concerned Central Ministries to keep at least 10% of their Plan budget for each CSS
as flexi- funds. In the year 2016, as per the instructions of NITI Aayog, Government of
India vides its O.M. dated 06. 09.2016 have raised the flexi-funds available in each CSS
to 25 % of the overall annual allocation under each scheme. This will be applicable for
Centrally Sponsored Schemes, except those which emanate from a legislation (e.g.
MGNREGA), or, schemes where the whole or a substantial proportion of the budgetary
allocation is flexible (e.g. RKVY, Border Area Development Program, Shyama Prasad
Mukherjee Rurban Mission etc).
The flexi –funds component within the Centrally Sponsored Schemes can be used to
achieve the following objectives:
(i) To provide flexibility to States to meet local needs and requirements within the
overall objective of any given scheme at the sub-head level;
(ii) To pilot innovations to improve efficiency within the overall objective of any
given Scheme at sub-head level;
(iii) To undertake mitigation /restoration activities in case of natural
calamities or to satisfy local requirements in areas affected by internal security
disturbances.
The flexi- fund guidelines have already been circulated to all departments vide
Government of Odisha, Finance Department Letter No. 26221 dated 26.09.2016. As per
the mandates of the original guidelines of 2014 the Planning & Convergence Department
of the State Government have already constituted a State Level Sanctioning Committee
(S.L.S.C.) vide Resolution No. 2057/P dated 14.02.2014 for sanction of projects under
the Flexi-Funds Component of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs). The composition of
the S.L.S.C. is as follows:

i. Development Commissioner-cumAddl. Chief Secretary- Chair Person
ii Principal Secretary/ Commissioner-cumSecretary of concerned Department- Member
iii Special Secretary, Planning & Convergence
Department
- Member
iv Representative of Finance Department,

- Member
v Representative of concerned Ministry of
Government of India
- Member
vi Representative of Planning Commission,
Government of India
- Member
vii Director, (DF & C) - cum- Addl. Secretary,
Planning & Convergence Department.
- Member- Secretary
At present there are 66 Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) rationalized into 28
Umbrella Schemes. The departments of the State Government implementing CSS(s) as
specified by the O.M. can utilize flexi-funds for taking up necessary mitigation
/restoration activities in the event of natural calamity, where these are in line with the
overall aim and objectives of the approved Scheme.

Chapter – V
Preparedness Measures
5.1 Context:
Preparedness is the knowledge-induced and capacitated pre-emergency
measures developed to anticipate, forecast, effectively respond and recover
from any unavoidable emergency situations. May it be the four priorities of
the Sendai Framework for DRR or be the 17 Sustainable Development Goals
or 10 points agenda for Disaster Risk Reduction of the Hon’ble Prime Minister
of India declared in the Asian Ministerial Conference for Disaster Risk
Reduction (AMCDRR), all emphasizes preparedness. Preparedness enabling
activities like planning, awareness, education, exercises, regular testing of
warning systems and plans for evacuation backed with clear-cut guidelines,
allocation of responsibilities & budgetary provisions improves the response
mechanism to a disaster in terms of timely and effective rescue and relief
operations.
5.1.1 Legal Context (Provisions of the DM Act 2005):
 Section 39(a) mandates the Departments / Ministries of State
Government to prepare disaster management plans keeping mitigation,
preparedness and response elements into consideration.
 Sections 22(2)(f), mandates the State Executive Committee (SEC) to
evaluate the preparedness at all level & give directions to enhance
preparedness in the state.
 Section 24 indicates role of State Executive Committee in protecting &
assisting the community in preventing or combating any threatening
disaster.
 Section 30 (2) (IV) defines the role of District Disaster Management
Authorities (DDMA) in the field of prevention, mitigation &
preparedness for any threatening disaster.

 Section 34 postulates preparedness of the DDMA for the purpose of
assisting, protecting or providing relief to the community, in response
to any threatening disaster.
5.2 Institutional Framework
Chapter-III provides an overview of the institutional arrangements
covering all aspects of disaster management. Here is a brief of the institutions
having key role for disaster Management in the State.
 Revenue & Disaster Management Department
 State Level Committee on Natural Calamities (SLCNC)
 Special Relief Organization (SRO)
 Odisha State Disaster Management Authority (OSDMA)
 Odisha Disaster Rapid Action Force (ODRAF)
 District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA)
 District Level Committee on Natural Calamities (DLCNC)
 Cyclone Shelter Management & Maintenance Committee (CSMMC)
& Flood Shelter Management & Maintenance Committee (FSMMC)
 Fire & Emergency Services
 Civil Defence, Red Cross Volunteers etc.
 National Disaster Response Force (NDRF)
 Armed Forces
5.3 Protocol for Early Warning.
State Emergency Operation Centre (SEOC) remains functional, 24x7,
round the year in the office of the Special Relief Commissioner at Rajiv
Bhavan, Unit-V, Bhubaneswar-751001. This acts as the nerve centre for
coordination, centralized early warning dissemination for any emergency
situation or disasters at the state level. SEOC works in close coordination with
the National Emergency Operation Centre (NEOC) at the national level.
Different national level agencies identified for addressing different types of
disasters as are follows:
GOI designated agencies Table- 5.1
Sl. Hazard Agencies
1 Avalanches Snow and Avalanche Study Establishment (SASE)

2 Cyclone India Meteorological Department (IMD)
3 Drought Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare (MoAFW)
4 Earthquake India Meteorological Department (IMD)
5 Epidemics Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW)
6 Floods Central Water Commission (CWC)
7 Landslides Geological Survey of India (GSI)
8 Tsunami Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS)
(Source: National Disaster Management Plan-2016)
5.3.1 Early Warning:
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)
Early Warning:
 Early warning for natural disasters to be given by Revenue and DM
Department through SEOC.
 Every mode of communication is to be utilized to make the early
warnings. Radio, Television, Newspapers, Sirens, Public Address
Systems, even beating the drums should be utilized to warn the public.
Prerecorded messages may be utilized for the purpose.
 Public Address Systems mounted on a vehicle, vehicles–jeep, medium
vehicles, tractors, motorcycles, three wheelers cycles are to be used.
Even drums, megaphone may be used to alert public.
 Weekly markets can be utilized to give wide publicity for early
warning.
 DEOC and other line department offices to ensure necessary support
for vehicle, public address system and logistic if required for effective
early warning.
Early Warning: Timings
 The principle followed should be “sooner the better”.
 No time would be wasted in drafting the message to be announced to
the public.
 Early warring to be given at right time, well in advance so that people
get a chance to prepare themselves for the disaster.
 Early warning should be made on a continued basis.

Early Warning: Message
 Early warning must be clear and specific regarding the threat of the
disaster, type of disaster, probable time of disaster strike, severity etc.
 Early warning is not to create panic amongst the public. As far as
possible early warning be given during the day time apart from
exigencies where nights cannot be avoided.
 Early warning also instructs public regarding their future plan of
action.
 Talk to people as much as possible and convince them not to
underestimate the disaster.
 Take the help of revenue officials, local NGOs, NCC, teachers, local
public representatives to give wide publicity regarding necessary
precautions.
Early Warning: Coverage
 Early warning should reach every area and to each individual.
 If required, services of field level offices of Government e.g. police
stations, outposts and RI offices may be taken for giving early warning
in their respective jurisdiction areas.
 Specific care must be taken to warn remote and inaccessible areas and
more vulnerable pockets.
 Home Guards, Gramrakhis, must be briefed to disseminate the warning
with immediate effect.
Early Warning: Monitoring
 The supervision of the early warning is carried out by the EOCs at
different levels.
 Collector may send officers from the district headquarters to supervise
the early warning along with public address system.
 Local officers to ensure proper early warning is disseminated to each
and every corner and to each and every individual.
 District Headquarters to collect time to time information from blocks
and other sources regarding progress in early warning, areas covered,
mode of early warning, number of times warning given.

 Supervising officers to report regarding their observation and
satisfaction regarding early warning operation.
 The supervising officers are instructed to remain well informed about
the impounding disaster.
5.4 Disaster Management Planning:
Disaster Management Act 2005 emphasizes planning for disaster
management at different levels. Further, Priority I & II of the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (SFDRR) i.e. “Understanding
Disaster Risk” & “Strengthening Disaster Risk Governance” also suggests
about well laid planning for implementation.
5.4.1 Strengthening State Disaster Management Authority
(SDMA) & District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA):
Odisha State Disaster Management Authority (OSDMA), since its creation
in 1999 has been spearheading the planning, preparedness & prevention in the
state. It has been bestowed with the responsibility of strengthening State,
Districts & Departments in disaster management. However, with a view to
further strengthening the State & District Disaster Management Authorities,
State Project Officers have been placed in OSDMA & District Project Officers
at the district level to carry out the following activities.
 Implementation of the provisions of the DM Act with regards to
functioning of SDMA & DDMA
 Hazard, Risk and Vulnerability Assessment study of different parts of
the state;
 Preparation, updation & review of State Disaster Management Plan
(SDMP) in state as per NDMA guidelines.
 Facilitate the departments for preparation of their disaster management
plans as per the Disaster Management Act and NDMA/ SDMA
guidelines;
 Facilitate the review & updation of the District Disaster Management
Plans and such plans at different levels;
 Coordinate with various organizations for conducting mock drills at
different levels;

 Carry out different disaster management activities and programme for
disaster risk reduction;
5.4.1.1 Disaster Management Plan
As per the section 11, 23, 31 & 40 of the Disaster Management Act 2005,
disaster management plans have been prepared at different levels e.g. State,
Department, District, Block /ULBs & Village. The details of plans for the
financial year 2019-20 are as follows.
 State Disaster Management Plan for the whole state.
 District Disaster Management Plan of all the 30 districts.
 Village Disaster Management Plans for 10,000 most vulnerable
villages of the state.
 City Disaster Management Plan for major cities of the state.
The disaster management plan templates have been standardized for the
Departments and Districts with the following unique features.
 Efforts have been put in to make the plans more usable rather than an
advisory or reference document.
 Standard templates for Departmental & District Disaster Management
Plan have been devised.
 The District Disaster Management Plans with two volumes (Volume –
I: main document & the Volume- II: reference document containing
complete database of the district) have been made more comprehensive
& user friendly.
5.5 Community Based Disaster Management (CBDM):
Community, being the first to take on & respond to a disaster, is the prime
unit of Disaster Management. Disaster management has been dealt by the
central & state Govt. directly for a long period of time. However, with the
change of time & enactment of DM Act 2005 & enforcement of DM policy
2009 as well as the international intervention, the involvement of community
in the field of disaster management has been proclaimed. Some of the
important proclamations towards community based disaster management are
as follows.

 Section 41 of the DM Act 2005 emphasizes on the importance of
Community Level Disaster Management.
 Section 5.3.1 & 5.3.2 of the DM Policy 2009 indicates the Community
Based Preparedness.
 Sections 18 (d) of SFDRR 2015 -2030 aims at “substantial increase in
the number of countries with national and local disaster risk reduction
strategies by 2020”.
5.5.1 Community Preparedness in the State:
In order to reduce the vulnerabilities in communities the Community
Based Disaster Preparedness (CBDP) programme was implemented from 2002
to 2009 in 16 coastal districts with the support of the Government of India
(Ministry of Home Affairs) and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) with a goal of “Sustainable Disaster Risk Reduction of communities
in the most hazard-prone districts”. The programme components included
 Development of Disaster Management Plans at district, block,
gram panchayat & village level
 Constitution of Disaster Management teams & committees at all
levels with adequate representation of women in all committees.
Community Based Disaster Preparedness Table 5.2
Sl.
No
Name of
District
ULBs
Programmed
Blocks
Programmed
GPs
Programmed
Villages
Programmed
1 Angul 3 8 209 1637
2 Balasore 4 12 289 2647
3 Bhadrak 2 7 193 1248
4 Cuttack 3 14 342 1844
5 Ganjam 13 13 292 1423
6 Jagatsinghpur 2 8 198 1232
7 Jajpur 2 10 280 1572
8 Kendrapara 2 9 230 1405
9 Keonjhar 4 3 68 496
10 Khordha 4 10 168 1527
11 Koraput 4 14 226 1915
12 Mayurbhanj 2 11 57 225
13 Nuapada 2 5 109 638
14 Puri 4 11 230 1589
15 Rayagada 3 11 171 2540
16 Sambalpur 4 9 148 1325

Total 58 155 3210 23263
(Source: OSDMA website, DRM Programme)
5.5.1.1 Multipurpose Cyclone & Flood Shelters: resilient hubs for
community
879 shelter buildings are being constructed in 25 cyclone & flood prone
districts. In addition to this, 65 MCS have been constructed by Indian Red
Cross Society, Odisha State Branch in different cyclone prone villages. All the
shelter buildings are stilted structures with sanitation facilities, separate halls
for men and women. Both ramp & staircase have been provided for easy
access to physically-challenged persons to the first floor during any
emergency.
About 32 types of emergency equipment are provided to the cyclone and
flood shelters. The equipment includes noise-less diesel generator set,
inflatable tower light, power saws, search & rescue equipment, foldable
stretcher, florescent jackets, life jackets, life buoy, First Aid kit, siren, mega
phone, free kitchen utensils etc.
50 Taskforce volunteers, both male and female in the age group of 18 to
35 from each shelter are being trained for 11 days on Search & Rescue, First
Aid and Operation & Maintenance of the equipment by master trainers from
Civil Defense, St. John Ambulance, ODRAF personnel & District level
Trainers. The training on effective Shelter Management to CSMMC/FSMMC
members, training on Record Keeping & Standard Shelter Equipment
Operational Skills are also provided.
In addition, five thousand seven hundred fifty-eight (5758) primary
schools & 1152 high school buildings have been constructed with assistance
from PMNRF, CMRF, MPLAD, NFCR, OBB, other State Governments &
NGOs. 3132 primary school buildings have been constructed & handed over
under DFID scheme. These school buildings will also be used as cyclone/flood
shelters in emergency.
5.6 The Response Force
5.6.1. Trained volunteers & Response force.

Foreseeing the requirement of volunteers, & trained personnel at time of
emergency, steps have been taken towards creating skilled force by imparting
training to village volunteers & college students on disaster management. Here
is a brief description of the volunteers trained on disaster management in the
year 2016-17
Trained Volunteers (Table 5.3)
Sl
No
Target Group Training
(In Nos.)
Coverage
(In Nos.)
1 Student of Schools & Colleges, YRC, NSS volunteers
& NCC on Disaster Preparedness & Survival
13 2700
2 Members CSMMC/FSMMC on Shelter Management 324 16200
3 CSMMC/FSMMC Task Force Volunteers on Search
& Rescue & First Aid
5 250
4 Orientation of District level Officers on Preparation of
District D.M. Plan.
3 81
5 Mason Training on Construction of Disaster Resilient
Houses
61 2642
6 Govt. Officials, Response Forces, NGOs and other
stakeholders on different aspects of Disaster
Management
28 714
7 Civil Defence Volunteers on Relief Line Clearance &
Tsunami
2 66
8 Aapda Mitra volunteers in Jagatsinghpur & Puri
Districts
16 400
9 Training of community Volunteers of Gajapati on
disasters response
03 92
10 Training to YRC & JRC counsellors on Disaster
Management & Disaster Survival skills
04 115
TOTAL 459 23260
5.6.2 Odisha Disaster Rapid Action Force (ODRAF)
ODRAF has emerged as a formidable opponent of disasters. The highly
trained manpower of the ODRAF is capable of handling multifarious disasters.
The Odisha Disaster Rapid Action Force (ODRAF) units have been carved out
of the Odisha Special Armed Police (OSAP), Armed Police Reserve (APR)
and India Reserve Battalions (IRB) & Special India Reserve Battalion (SIRB).
The personnel of ODRAF are provided with comprehensive training in saving
human lives and reaching out to the helpless population affected by disasters.
At present, 20 ODRAF units are operating in the State.
The effectiveness of managing disaster depends on skilled manpower
equipped with modern technology based equipment. The knowledge & skill of

ODRAF is refreshed, upgraded & assessed at a regular interval through
various capacity building activities, outdoor drills & skill matrix respectively
(Details are in chapter- VII). The modus operandi developed for strengthening
the ODRAF will continue to carry the initiative on a sustainable basis.
Similarly, the equipment’s are tested in mock exercises, demonstrations &
training programmes in order to ensure their functionality. The equipment,
infrastructure, running cost, training & capacity building and maintenance are
taken care of by OSDMA. The funding of the ODRAF is from the SDRF &
State Budget. The list of standardized equipment designated for each ODRAF
unit in the state is as follows.
List of equipment for ODRAF units (Table 5.4)
Sl Category Equipment Qty. Per
unit

1. Flood Rescue Operation
Surface Water
Life Jackets (Standard) 100 nos.
2 Life Jackets (Working) 50 nos.
3 Life Buoy (Ring) 30 nos.
4 3strand 14mm PP Rope for mooring (35 mtrs) 10 nos.
5 Inflatable Rubber Boat (10 men) accessories 10 sets
6 Out Board Motor (2 stroke) with accessories 10 sets
7 Air Pressure Provider 10 sets
8 Repairing kit for Boat 10 sets
9 Repairing kit for OBM 10 sets
10 Mini Fire Extinguisher for flammable Liquid 10 nos.
11 Blower for Inflation & Deflation 10 nos.
12 Stand for OBM 5 nos.
13 OBM carrier 10 nos.

UNDER
WATERSCUBA sets with communication & BCD &
accessories for under water salvage Ops 3 set
15 HP Compressor for SCUBA & SCUBA 3 set

2. Collapsed Structure
Search & Rescue
CSSR Tools, Equipment & accessories 1 set
17 Concrete Cutter 5 nos.
18 Hydraulic Power Shore Unit 2 nos.
19 Self-contained Breathing Apparatus 8 nos.
20 Branch Cutting Saw (Electric) 5 nos.
21 Mountaineering Equipment 5 set

22 Telescopic Aluminum Ladder (40 ft) 5 nos.
23 30ft Extension Ladder 5 nos.
24 Rope Ladder 5 nos.
25 4.5kg CO2 Fire Extinguisher 8 nos.
26 Forceable entry tools 5 sets
27 Lifting Bags 2 set
28 Rope Deployment System 2 nos.

3. Relief Line
Chain Saw (one man operated) 20 set
30 Chain Saw (two man operated) with power
pack 5 set
31 Lifting/ Pulling Machine/Come along 5 set
32 Hydraulic Combitools with power pack 1 set
33 Hydraulic Spreader with power pack 1 set
34 Hydraulic Cutter with power pack 1 set
35 Gas Cutting equipment sets 1 set
36 Bullet Chain Saw 10 nos.
37 Log carrier 10 nos.
38 Rope Nylon 300 Kg
39 Sisal Rope 12mm/24mm 300 Kg
40 Fire Axe 20 nos.
41 Axe 20 nos.
42 Crow Bar 20 nos.
43 Pick Axe 20 nos.
44 Spade 20 nos.
45 Traffic Cone 30 nos.

4. Vehicle
&Machinery
TATA Truck 12 ton capacity 2 nos.
47 TATA Truck 6 ton capacity (Troop Carrier) 2 nos.
48 Recovery Van/Wreckage Crane (Reputed
Firm) 1 no
49 Backoe Loader cum Excavator(Reputed Firm) 1 no

5. MFR
Medical First Responder Kit (25 man) 5 kit
51 Medical First Responder Kit (50 man) 1 kit
52 Folding Standard Stretcher 5 nos.
53 Spine Board Long with Strap 5 nos.
54 Spine Board short with Strap 5 nos.

55 Blanket 10 nos.

6. Communication
Computers & Multifunctional Printers 1 set
57 Hand held Megaphones 10 nos.
58 Walki talkies with Spare Battery & charger 15 nos.
59 Camera with recording provision 5 nos.
60 GPS 5 nos.
61 Satellite phone 2 nos.
62 HAM Radio 1 set
63 Mobile phone 2 nos.
64 Land Line Phone 1 no
65 Fax Line 1 no
66 E-mail ID with internet connection

7. Maintenance
Air Compressor with Tire Inflator 1 set
68 Reciprocating Pump-cum-Vehicle Washer 1 No
69 Battery Charger 2 nos.
70 Chain sharpener 2 nos.
71 Small Tools 5 set

8. Operational Support equipment
Temporary Shelter (Flexi Tent) for six man 5 set
73 U.V Treated Polypropylene Tarpaulin 20 nos.
74 Cooking Utensil 2 set
75 G.I.Truck 20 nos.
76 Inflatable Tower Lighting system 10 nos.
77 LED High Beam Search Light 20 nos.
78 3 KVA Diesel Generators set with all
accessories 3 set
79 Extension Cord and Board 5 set
80 Range Umbrella 5 nos.
81 Camp Items Folding Table & Tools 2set
82 Office Furniture 1 set
(Source: Mechanical Section OSDMA))
Requisition & Deployment of ODRAF
For deployment of ODRAF unit, the Collector & District Magistrate files
requisition with the Special Relief Commissioner/ Managing Director,
OSDMA/ SEOC. However, telephonic requests are received by the State

Emergency Operation Centre/ identified officer in OSDMA to mobilize the
ODRAF teams without delay.
ODRAF units are uniformed service borne in the police administration.
They require a command from the competent authority for movement. The
Addl. DG of Police (Law & Order) who is the apex authority in the State for
movement of ODRAF is generally requested by the Special Relief
Commissioner/ Managing Director of OSDMA for issue of deployment
orders, which are non-negotiable. However, telephonic information for
deployment of ODRAF is passed on simultaneously to the Commandants of
the ODRAF units along with message to ADG of Police (Law & Order).
Since various types of state of the art mechanised and hydraulic equipment
are used by ODRAF, the same are kept in fighting-fit conditions always. To
reduce the complexities of repairing and maintaining the equipment, most of
the equipment are under annual maintenance contract with the manufacturer/
supplier. The fast-moving spares are kept ready to replace the defective ones
without delay. The critical equipment like OBMs are kept on standby so that
the relief operations during floods will not be hampered by downed machines.
During large scale emergency operations in high intensity flood/
cyclonic situation in a geographically contiguous region, for operational ease
and movement of men and machines, GATEWAY ODRAF is set up in the
nearest ODRAF unit or any other suitable location for making camp
arrangement where men and material resources of different ODRAF units are
gathered and kept under the operational command of a single officer. The
technical officers of OSDMA and maintenance staff of the AMC holders are
stationed at the GATEWAY ODRAF.
5.7 Techno Legal Regime:
Past disasters, that caused widespread damage resulting in loss of lives and
properties, have exposed the vulnerability of our State. This has ultimately
indicated requirement of a well laid techno legal regime to enhance the
resistance of the infrastructure to withstand multi level disasters which in turn
will minimize the loss of lives as well as property in the state. This needs to be
binding on the functionaries of the state Govt. to ensure the effectiveness of

techno-legal and techno-financial provisions. It is the responsibility of all
stakeholders concerned, to implement, monitor & verify these provisions at
different levels.
Adoption of best management practices like self-certification, social audit,
and an external compliance regime including audit by professional agencies,
need to be encouraged in consultation with various stakeholders and
knowledge institutions for adoption after due trial and validation. After having
put the techno-legal and compliance system, enforcement of the same must be
ensured by establishing an effective mechanism, under the provisions of the
act. A list of disaster specific Acts, Rules and Regulations that can be brought
under the concept of techno legal regime are enlisted below.
I. General
1. The Civil Defense Act, 1968.
2. Disaster Management Act, 2005.
3. Food safety and standards act 2006
4. The disaster management (National Disaster Response Force) rules,
2008
II. Flood, dam burst, tsunami and cyclone, cloud burst
1. Dam safety bill 2010
2. Coastal regulation zone notification 2011
3. The water (prevention and control of pollution) act, 1974
4. The water (prevention and control of pollution) rules, 1975
III. Lightning
1. Indian standard protection of buildings and allied structures against
lightning code of practice 1991
IV. Earthquake, snow avalanches/ landslide
1. Indian standards on earthquake engineering
2. Model town and country planning act 1960
3. Model building by- laws 2004
4. National building code of India 2005
V. Drought
1. Manual for Drought Management 2016
VI. Fire & Explosive
1. The boilers act, 1923

2. The cinematograph film rule 1948
3. Oilfields (regulation and development) act, 1948
4. The cinematograph act, 1952
5. The inflammable substances act, 1952
6. The mines act, 1952
7. India electricity rules, 1956
8. The coal mines regulations, 1957
9. The coal mines (conservation and development) act, 1974
10. The mines rescue rules, 1985
11. Indian electricity act 2003
12. The mines and minerals (development & regulation) act, 2010
13. The oil mines regulations, 2011
14. The explosives act, 1884
15. The explosive substances act, 1908(amendment act of 2001)
16. Petroleum act, 1934
17. The atomic energy act 1962
18. The static and mobile pressure vessels (unfired) rules 1981
VII. Chemical/ industrial/ nuclear
1. The factories act, 1948 as amended by the factories (amendment) act,
1987.
2. Public liability insurance act, 1991
3. The public liability insurance rules, 1991
4. Atomic energy (working of the mines, minerals and handling of
prescribed substances) rules, 1984
5. Hazardous wastes (management and handling) rules, 1989
6. The gas cylinder rules 2004
7. The petroleum and natural gas regulatory board act, 2006
8. The explosives rules, 2008
9. Hazardous wastes (management, handling and trans boundary
movement) rules, 2008.
10. Atomic energy (safe disposal of radioactive wastes) rules, 1987. 2. The
Bhopal gas leak disaster (processing of claims) act, 1985
11. Calcium carbide rules, 1987

12. The manufacture, storage and import of hazardous chemical rules,
1989
13. Chemical accidents (emergency planning, preparedness, and response)
rules, 1996
14. The major accident hazard control rules, 1997
15. Dumping and disposal of fly ash discharged from coal or lignite based
thermal power plans on land rules 1999
16. The chemical weapons convention act, 2000
17. Atomic energy (radiation protection) rules 2004
18. Weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems (prohibition of
unlawful activities) act, 2005
19. The civil liability for nuclear damage act, 2010
VIII. Biological disaster
1. Bio- medical waste (management and handling) rules 1998
2. The municipal solid wastes (management & handling) rules, 2000
3. Rules for the manufacture, use, import, export and storage of
hazardous micro organisms genetically engineered organisms or cells
1989
IX. Poisoning
1. The destructive insects and pests act, 1914
2. The poisons act, 1919
3. The drugs and cosmetics act, 1940
4. The prevention of food adulteration act, 1954
5. The insecticides act, 1968
6. The insecticides rules, 1971
7. The narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances act, 1985
8. The consumer protection act, 1986
9. The batteries (management and handling) rules, 2001.
10. Batteries (management & handling) amendment rules, 2010
11. E-waste (management and handling) rules, 2011
12. Plastics (manufacture, usage and waste management) rules, 2011
X. Accident
1. The inland vessels act, 1917
2. The Indian carriage of goods by sea act, 1925

3. The aircraft act, 1934
4. Aircraft rules, 1937.
5. National highways act, 1956
6. The merchant shipping act, 1958
7. Carriage by air act 1972
8. The inland waterways authority of india act, 1985
9. Motor vehicles act 1988
10. The railways act, 1989
11. Central motor vehicles rules, 1989
12. The railway accidents and untoward incidents (compensation) rules,
1990
13. Railway (notices of and inquiries into accidents) rules, 1998
14. Statutory investigation into railway accidents rules 1998
15. Carriage by road act, 2007
16. Carriage by road rules 2011
XI. Stampede: disaster from management
1. A guide for administrators and organizers of events and venues of
mass gathering- a guide for state government, local authorities,
administrators and organisers, NDMA
2. Police act 186
XII. Pest attack
1. Destructive insects and pests act 1914
2. Insecticides act 1968
3. Insecticides rules 1971
XII. Epidemics
1. Epidemic Disease Act 1897
XIV Forest & Environment
1. The wild life (protection) act, 1972
2. Forest (conservation) act, 1980
3. The air (prevention and control of pollution) act, 1981
4. The air (prevention and control of pollution) rules, 1982
5. Environment (protection) act, 1986
6. The Environment (protection) rules, 1986
7. The biological diversity act, 2002

8. Forest (conservation) rules, 2003
9. The protection of plant varieties and farmers’ rights act, 2001
10. Cultural heritage conservation bill, 2010
11. National green tribunal act 2010
12. Wetlands (conservation and management) rules, 2010
XV. NDMA guidelines (http://ndma.gov.in/en/ndma-guidelines.html)
1. Guidelines for preparation of Action Plan –Prevention & Management
of Heat wave -2017
2. Guidelines on Management of School Safety
3. Guidelines on Management of Hospital Safety
4. Guidelines on Minimum Standards for Shelter, Food, Water,
Sanitation, Medical Cover in Relief Camps
5. Guidelines on Management of Earthquakes
6. Guidelines on Management of Tsunami
7. Guidelines on Management of Cyclones
8. Guidelines for Management of Flood
9. Guidelines on Management of Urban Flooding
10. Guidelines on Drought Management
11. Guidelines for diversion of forest lands for non-forest purpose under
the forest (Conservation), act 1980
12. Guidelines on Landslides and Snow Avalanches
13. Guidelines for Nuclear and Radiological Emergencies
14. Guidelines on Chemical Disaster (Industrial)
15. Guidelines for Chemical (Terrorism) Disaster
16. Guidelines on Medical Preparedness & Mass Casualty Management
17. Guidelines for Management of Biological Disaster
18. Guidelines for Psycho-Social Support
19. Guidelines on Formulation of State DM Plans
20. Guidelines for Incident Response System.
21. Guidelines on National Disaster Management Information and
Communication System.
22. Guidelines for Scaling, Type of Equipment and Training of Fire
Services.

23. Guidelines for Seismic Retrofitting of Deficient Buildings and
Structures.
5.8 Early Warning Dissemination System
The SEOC receives alert from different designated agencies of GOI &
GoO (Table- 5.3.1) & disseminate to all the relevant departments of the state
Govt. & DEOCs functioning under the district administration through all
possible methods of communication & public announcements. Both Terrestrial
& Satellite network of communication are used for warning alert at different
viz. State, Department, District, Block & Community level in the state. The
detailed description of the network of communication is detailed in the table
5.5 below:
Communication Method (Table 5.5)
Sl. Network Communication Method
TERRESTERIAL
1 Cellular Voice Call, Data & Mass Messaging,
2 Landline Voice call, Fax
3 Internet Mail, Bulk mails
SATELITE
4 HAM Radio High Frequency & Very High Frequency
5 Satellite Phone Voice call & messages, GPS locations.
5.8.1 Ensuring Early Warning in the Coastal Districts.
Odisha coast stretching to a length of 480 KM along the Bay of Bengal in the
eastern India covers six districts viz. Balasore, Bhadrak, Jagatsinghpur,
Kendrapara, Puri and Ganjam is prone to multiple hydro meteorological
hazards. In order to reduce the vulnerability of coastal communities from
impending calamities like flood, cyclone and tsunami, Odisha, furthering a
step ahead, has taken a first of its kind initiative in India to install multiple
Early Warning Dissemination System (EWDS) for strengthening the
dissemination of warning for the coastal people. The selected technologies
were best suited for different purposes and can be used for different
applications and groups. The major attributes of the EWDS are:
 The EWDS will be commissioned in districts and will be directly
controlled from the SEOC.

 Siren will be activated much before the arrival of any calamity so as to
provide adequate time to the administration as well as the community
to face the eventuality.
 The Early Warning technologies includes Mass Messaging, Alert
Tower Siren System, Digital Mobile Radio (DMR) and SatelliteBased Mobile Data / Voice terminals (SBMDV) Technologies for
pre, during and post disasters.
 OSWAN, with strong Internet Broadband Connectivity, enables State
Emergency Operation Centre (SEOC), District Emergency Operation
Centre (DEOC) and Block Emergency Operation Centre (BEOC) for
emergency coordination.
Under the Coastal EWDS network a total of 327 villages in 22 blocks
under 6 districts are to be covered with 122 siren towers. The towers will be
controlled from the SEOC functional in the SRC’s office. With activating a
button at SEOC warning siren will be disseminated in all the 122 or the
targeted siren towers having a disseminating capacity of 3 KM diameter each.
The details of the locations of the tower are given below.
EWDS (Table 5.6)
Sl District Block No. of Siren
Towers
Villages
Covered

Balasore
Balasore Sadar 10 18
2 Remuna 2 6
3 Bahanga 5 15
4 Bhogarai 5 15
5 Baliapal 6 9
Sub Total 05 28 63

Bhadrak Basudevpur 4 17
7 Chandabali 11 24
Sub Total 02 15 41
8 Kendrapara Mahakalpara 7 18
9 Rajnagar 11 46
Sub Total 02 18 64

Jagatsinghpur
Ersama 7 11
11 Kujanga 2 8
12 Balikuda 3 8
Sub Total 03 12 27

Puri
Brahmagiri 2 6
14 Gop 4 7
15 Astaranga 9 25
16 Kakatpur 2 7
17 Krushnaprasad 6 37
18 Puri Sadar 3 5
Konark NAC 0 1
Sub Total 06 26 88

Ganjam
Chikiti 5 6
20 Rangeilunda 5 13
21 Chatrapur 4 10
22 Ganjam 7 15
Sub Total 04 21 44
GRAND TOTAL 22 122 327
(Source: GIS/MIS Section, OSDMA)
5.8.2 Satellite phones
The terrestrial telephones and mobile phones working close to capacity during
normal times are prone to be affected by natural disasters & disrupt the
connectivity when it is needed the most. The satellite phones or sat-phones
operate directly through geo-stationery satellites and therefore can avoid this
problem and provide failsafe communication in any eventuality.
 OSDMA has provided 60 INMARSAT ISAT-2 satellite phones to
the key disaster managers at the State and District level. Officers can move to
the disaster site with the satellite phone and restore connectivity if other modes
of communications have been disrupted or not available.
The list of satellite phone users with contact numbers is placed below:
Allotted Satellite Phone Numbers (Table 5.7)
Sl District
Calling
Numbers Sl District
Calling
Numbers
1 Collector Angul 8991118454 30 Collector Sundargarh 8991118483
2 Collector Balasore 8991118455 31 ODRAF Cuttack,
OASP 6th Battalion
8991118485
3 Collector Bargarh 8991118456 32 8991118484
4 Collector Bhadrak 8991118457 33 ODRAF Bhubaneswar,
OSAP 7th Battalion
8991118487
5 Collector Bolangir 8991118458 34 8991118486
6 Collector Boudh 8991118459 35 ODRAF Baripada,
OSAP 5th Battalion
8991118488
7 Collector Cuttack 8991118460 36 8991118489
8 Collector Deogarh 8991118461 37 ODRAF Rourkela,
OSAP 4th Battalion
8991118490
9 Collector Dhenkanal 8991118462 38 8991118491
10 Collector Gajapati 8991118463 39 ODRAF Koraput,
OSAP 3rd Battalion
8991118492
11 Collector Ganjam 8991118464 40 8991118493
12 Collector Jagatsinghpur 8991118465 41 ODRAF Jharsuguda,
OSAP 2nd Battalion
8991118495
13 Collector Jajpur 8991118466 42 8991118494
14 Collector Jharsuguda 8991118467 43 ODRAF Chattrapur,
OSAP 8th Battalion
8991118496
15 Collector Kalahandi 8991118468 44 8991118497
16 Collector Kandhamal 8991118469 45
ODRAF Balasore 8991118499
17 Collector Kendrapada 8991118470 46 8991118498
18 Collector Keonjhar 8991118471 47
ODRAF Bolangir 8991118500
19 Collector Khorda 8991118472 48 8991118501
20 Collector Koraput 8991118473 49 ODRAF Jagatsinghpur 8991118502

21 Collector Malkangiri 8991118474 50 8991118503
22 Collector Mayurbhanj 8991118475 51 State Fire Office 8991118504
23 Collector Nabarangpur 8991118476 52 Commissioner of
Police 8991118505
24 Collector Nayagarh 8991118477 53 Revenue & DM
Department 8991118506
25 Collector Nuapada 8991118478 54 Managing Director,
OSDMA 8991118507
26 Collector Puri 8991118479 55 Office of Chief
Secretary 8991118508
27 Collector Rayagada 8991118480 56 Office of Chief
Minister 8991118509
28 Collector Sambalpur 8991118481 57 Special Relief
Commissioner (SEOC) 8991118510
29 Collector Subarnapur 8991118482 58 Managing Director,
OSDMA 8991118511
(Source: MIS Section, OSDMA)
5.9 Drought Management: State Drought Monitoring
Cell
Most of the cultivable land in Odisha depends on monsoon rain for
irrigation & hence make the state prone to drought. This in turn led the state
face severe drought in 2011 (19 districts), 2012 (four districts) and 2015 (27
districts). In order to combat drought, the State Govt. has set up State Drought
Monitoring Cell (SDMC) in OSDMA. OSDMA has entered into a MoU with
Karnataka State Natural Disaster Management Centre (KSNDMC) for
technical collaboration for setting up the SDMC.
Under the SDMC, nearly 6000 Automatic Rain Gauge Stations & 320
Automatic Weather Stations to monitor rainfall on a daily basis are to be
installed across the state. Special agriculture scientists and engineers would be
appointed in the cell," The cell will help sensitize the farmers about the
climatic condition and to take precautionary measures accordingly. Besides, a
24x7 call centre will be established along with the cell to respond to queries of
the farmers. The project will help the State in
 Strengthening the network of weather monitoring system
 Devising appropriate drought management
 High value crops can be brought under the ambit of crop insurance.
 Empower the farmers in taking informed decisions in case of aberrant
weather conditions.

5.9.1 Present Status of State Drought Monitoring Cell (SDMC)
It was decided by State Executive Committee (SEC) in its meeting held on
5.01.2017 to set up State Drought Monitoring Cell (SDMC) in OSDMA for
weather data monitoring as well as drought management related activities. The
State Level Sanctioning Committee of RKVY under the chairmanship of Chief
Secretary has accorded the setting up of the SDMC and the array of Automatic
Weather Stations (AWS) and Automatic Rain Gauges (ARG) across the state.
Drought Monitoring Cell: State level Drought Monitoring Cell has been
setup in the office of OSDMA with the following main objectives:
a. To promote and enhance knowledge and human resource exchange
between the institutes.
b. To share experience, subject expertise and technical knowhow
between the institutes.
c. To undertake joint research programmes, as necessary for
furthering the cause of disaster and risk reduction thereof.
d. To undertake all such activities that the Governing Body of the
institutes may permit from time to time.
e. To optimize the utilization of available resources, so as to
minimize the wastage of available resources of any type.
An Expert Committee has been constituted under SDMC to provide
technical advice and recommendations to the Government for management
of drought in the state, based on the technical and scientific inputs on
drought monitoring, weather advisories and other related information. The
committee comprises decision makers & scientists as follows.
a. Managing Director, OSDMA- Chairman
b. Director, Agriculture & Food Production-Member
c. Director, Horticulture-Member
d. Director, Soil Conservation and OWDM -Member
e. The Director, India Meteorological Department, Odisha -Member
f. Prof OUAT, Agro-meteorology-Member
g. Director, National Rice Research Institute (NRRI) -Member
h. DGM, Agriculture Insurance Company-Member
i. Representative from NABARD-Member
j. Deputy Relief Commissioner-Member
k. Engineer in Chief, Water Resources -Member
l. Nodal Officer, SDMC -Member Convener

Further, different Departments of the State will provide the following information
to the State Drought Monitoring Cell (SDMC) periodically as prescribed for
effective management of Drought in the state.
Periodical information from Departments to SDMC (Table 5.8)
Sl
No
Indices Department/Organisations
1. Rainfall Related Indices
i. Rainfall data/ deviation
IMD/SRC/Agriculture/DoWR to provide
the rainfall data recorded in the
Manual/telemetric weather stations
ii. Dry Spell IMD
iii. Standardised precipitation index IMD
2. Remote Sensing based Vegetation
Indices
Agriculture & FE department will collect
information from NRSC and provide to
SDMC
3. Crop Situation Related Indices
i. Area under showing Agriculture & FE department/ Directorate
of Agriculture
ii. Soil moisture
4. Hydrological Indices
i. Reservoir Storage Index DoWR
ii. Ground Water Drought Index DoWR/ Central Ground Water Board
iii. Stream flow Drought Index DoWR
5.9.1 Lightning & Cloud Burst warning: Doppler Radars
Observing the weather and timely prediction of severe weather conditions to
warn the public in due course is very vital to mitigate as well as prevent losses.
Weather radars are the most important and critical instruments for observing
weather and early warning systems. Radars provide real time and accurate
information on hazardous weather phenomena such as strong wind, heavy
precipitation and hail in large scale area. The whole area of Odisha has been
planned to be put under surveillance of 4 Doppler Weather Radar (DWR)
stations i.e. in Paradeep, Gopalpur, Sambalpur & Balasore. DWRs have
been installed in Paradeep & Gopalpur and are functional. The salient features
of the DWR are as follows:
 DWR is a digital Radar
 It is capable to find internal motions of hydrometeors within a sample
volume and provide real time accurate data on velocity, turbulence
information, intensity, rain rate, vertical extent, drop size distribution
etc. of weather systems around DWR site.

 Used for cyclone tracking and forecasting task
 Gives data of maximum velocity inside a Cyclonic storm precisely
which helps in improving the intensity and storm surge
 Helps in Tornado/Thunderstorm/Hail-storm forecasting
5.10 NGO and other stakeholders
Over the last couple of decades it has been observed that NGOs play an
important role in disaster preparedness, response and mitigation efforts in
different regions. Many international NGOs specifically focus on providing
humanitarian aid to disaster affected people. Local NGOs in Odisha have also
played a dynamic role in disaster management in the last decade and during
Cyclone Phailin and Hudhud.
The Disaster Management Act, 2005 defines the roles and responsibilities of
different government bodies and recognizes the prime responsibility of the
state to be prepared for disaster response and the role of the humanitarian
agencies and NGOs is to supplement the efforts of the government to help
communities in coping and providing effective recovery from the disaster.
NGOs /INGOs have worked together to raise public awareness on disasters
and worked towards greater consensus on various issues and challenges
related to disaster management. Such initiatives have facilitated sharing of
problems, challenges, and vision building for collaborative steps for disaster
reduction initiatives in the state. NGOs and other stakeholders may help in:
 Awareness and sensitization on disaster management
 Monitoring and Information sharing between Government and NGOs.
 NGOs’ perspective on coordination during different phases of disaster
cycle
 Strengthen the coordination platform during non-emergency times with
appropriate linkages to the NDMA, SDMAs/ DDMAs.
 Develop a road-map with short, medium and long term operational
strategies and plans.
 Evolve mechanisms to ensure coordination during response operations
and in planning and operationalizing strategies.

 Strengthening district level coordination Mechanism & timeline for
development and Training.
5.11 Departmental Preparedness
5.11.1 Nodal Ministries for different Disasters
Departments need to prepare their specific disaster management plans &
update them every year as per the provisions of Disaster Management Act
2005. As such 19 Departments have prepared their Departmental Disaster
Management Plans for the year 2019 in a standard template prescribed by
OSDMA. Government of India designates specific departments with the nodal
responsibilities for coordinating disaster-specific responses (Table 5.9) to
curtail the constraints of location, nature of disaster and, most regrettably,
inadequate preparedness. This will help the first responders and relief reach
the affected areas in the shortest possible time.
Nodal Ministries for different Disasters (Table 5.9)
Sl Disaster Nodal Ministry/ Dept./ Agency
1 Biological Disasters Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(H&FW)
2 Chemical Disasters and
Industrial Accidents
Ministry of Forest, Environment, and Climate
Change (FECC)
3 Civil Aviation Accidents Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA)
4 Cyclone, Tornado, and
Tsunami
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
5 Disasters in Mines Ministry of Coal; Ministry of Mines (MoC,
MoM)
6 Drought, Hailstorm, Cold
Wave and Frost, Pest attack
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare (AFW)
7 Earthquake Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
8 Flood Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
9 Forest Fire Ministry of Forest, Environment, and Climate
Change (FECC)
10 Landslides and Avalanche Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
11 Nuclear and Radiological
Emergencies
Dept. of Atomic Energy, & Ministry of
Home Affairs (DAE,MHA)
12 Oil Spills Ministry of Defence/Indian Coast Guard
(MoD/ICG)
13 Rail Accidents Ministry of Railways (MoR)

14 Road Accidents Ministry of Road Transport
15 Urban Floods Ministry of Housing & Urban Development
(Source: National Disaster Management Plan-2016)
5.12 India Disaster Resource Network (IDRN)
Pre-positioning of human resources & materials is essential for quick response
thereby saving time, resource & minimizing severity of any emergency. This
again depends upon the organization, readiness & availability of manpower &
materials, within and in the neighboring areas, to face any impending disaster.
To manage disasters effectively, organizing human & materials from the local
to the national & beyond is equally important. The India Disaster Resource
Network hosted in the NIC at http://www.idrn.gov.in by MHA is a right
platform that inventorises the resources at the district, state & nation level and
provides a user friendly interface to get a list of available resources at different
levels. But for its effectiveness, the information on the site must be updated at
a regular interval. The state makes it mandatory for the departments &
respective stakeholders at the district to upload the available resource in the
portal. Once the resource data base in the IDRN portal is created it will be
updated in a regular interval as prescribed.
5.13 Awareness and Sensitization on Disaster
Management
Massive awareness programmes were taken up throughout the state.
 29th October is being observed as the State Disaster Preparedness Day
& National Day for Disaster Risk Reduction.
 Video films have been developed for awareness of community on
Heat Wave, Cyclone Shelter Management, Health care & sanitation,
Food & nutrition, Community Based Disaster Preparedness &
functioning of ODRAF.
 Short films on Search & Rescue, First-Aid techniques, preparedness to
different disasters also have been developed & circulated across the
State.
 Posters, leaflets, handouts & booklets with information & safety tips
relating to different hazards have been prepared for information of
people.

 School safety programmes have been taken up & disaster
Management themes have been included in the school curricula.
 NGO coordination cells have been promoted at district & state level
for awareness generation & regular interaction with the civil society
for improvising preparedness & awareness on disaster management.
 Community level volunteers have been trained & competitions among
volunteers are organized on the occasions of Disaster Preparedness
Day.
5.14 Mock Drill
Mock drill is a mechanism to enhance & assess emergency planning to
deal with various disasters at the State, District and Community level. As
such, Odisha State Disaster Management Authority (OSDMA) in
collaboration with different departments and district administrations
coordinates Mock Drills for different disasters every year. This helps in
generating substantial awareness among all the stakeholders. The aim of Mock
Drill is to inculcate a culture of preparedness amongst the stakeholders, to
evaluate the resources available with various districts of the state, to
coordinate the activities of various agencies and use the feedback to identify
the gaps and improve upon them.
5.14.1 The objectives of the Mock Drill are:
• Generate public awareness on disaster preparedness
• Revitalize the response mechanism to remain in readiness to face any
eventuality arising out of calamities
• Strengthen the emergency communication procedures and system;
• Augment the capacity of the Govt. officials and other stakeholders for
better response.
• Familiarize community with the procedures of evacuation, shelter,
Search and Rescue (SAR) and First-Aid skills etc.
• Assess the readiness of the NDRF, ODRAF, Odisha Fire Service,
CSMMC task forces and other stakeholders
• Ensure readiness of MCS/MFS for evacuation of the vulnerable
population.
• Ensure & assess readiness of emergency equipment for use

5.14.2 Different Mock Drills conducted:
The under mentioned Mock Drill are being conducted in State, District, Block
and Shelter level from time to time:-
 Mock Drills on Chemical Disaster
 Partial Emergency Exercise at Airport
 Mock Drill on Flood & Cyclone in all the 30 Districts
 Mock Drill on Stampede for Rathayatra
 Tsunami Mock Drill in 6 coastal Districts
 Disaster Management Exercise on train accidents
5.15 Integrated Decision Support System (IDSS)
5.15.1 Operational Systems for Integrated Disaster Risk
Management for Odisha
OSDMA entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Regional
Integrated Multi-Hazard Early Warning System (RIMES) for a project “Operational
Systems for Integrated Disaster Risk Management for Odisha” to strengthen the
decision support system of the state by developing a one-stop Risk Management
System to effectively respond, mitigate & manage different disasters the state is
prone through development of various information technology & machine learning
led Decision Support System (DSS) tools. The Project envisages the following
objectives:
 Assess the current capacities of OSDMA
 Integrate best practices & cutting-edge forecast technologies into
OSDMA operations
 Transfer these technologies and practices to ODSMA
 Continued support to integrate emerging technologies into OSDMA
The DSS tools shall be designed to have multiple layers of user access control and
limit the roles and responsibility of the different category of users. The tools are
expected to assist OSDMA and the line departments in decision making to help the
target users basically who are directly affected by the disasters. A list of target users
for different hazards has been delineated in the below table.

Hazard Decision Support System Target Users of the
Tools
Heat wave Heat Wave Advisory System OSDMA and Public
Health Department
Drought Drought Risk Monitoring and
Management System
OSDMA and
Department of
Agriculture
Lightning Forecasting of Lightening Accidents and
Striking Hazard (FLASH)
OSDMA
Road
Accidents
Road Accident monitoring and reporting
system for Prevention of incidents of road
Disasters (RAPID)
OSDMA
Flood Flow forecast and flood early warning
system
OSDMA and CWC
Tsunami Internet-based Simulation Platform for
Inundation and Risk Evaluation
OSDMA
The project components are intended to be developed over a period of 3 years and
then put to operation for the next two years. During this time the tools also will
undergo evaluation, improvements and refinements based on feedback from the
users at different levels. Finally, all tools and technologies shall be transferred to
OSDMA and relevant departments of Government of Odisha. A model of the OneStop Risk Management System is depicted below:
Figure 1: Integrated platform for one stop Risk management System

5.15.2 Severe Weather Early Warning based on total Lightning
detection of the state of Odisha
OSDMA entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for a period of
three years with Earth Networks (EN) for a project “Severe Weather Early
Warning based on total Lightning detection of the state of Odisha” to support &
provide data services that will enable the state to provide timely alerts to its citizen
for lightening and severe weather caused due to convective storm systems. The
Project will enable the state to get:
 Real-time severe weather and lightning monitoring and reliable and
timely emergency alerting
 Providing dangerous thunderstorm alerts that provide region with at
least 45 minutes of advance warning where ther is thunderstorm
activities
 The dissemination of early warnings to mobile platforms via SMS & app
through an API
 A state of the art severe weather visualisation.
Total Lightining detection will enable severe weather detection for identification,
tracking, prediction of dangerous weather activity, including Severe thunderstorms,
High winds, Hail storms, Microbursts and wind shear, Tornadoes, Cloud-to-ground
lightning etc.
Dangerous Thunderstorm Alerts (DTAs)
Through innovative detection of in-cloud lightning & proprietary Dangerous
Thunderstorm Alerts (DTAs) under the project, the state will be able to provide
organizations around the world with the most technologically-advanced alerts. The
perfect solution for minimizing any severe weather risk are .
 Time-sensitive alerts issued ahead of approaching severe storms
 Measure cell IDs, cell time, cell area and cell latitude and longitude
 Provide approximately 45 minutes of advanced warning
 50% faster than other severe weather alerts

Chapter - VI
 Response
6.1 Response in brief
Response refers to activities done for handling disaster to bring the situation to normalcy as
per the decision of Government. The onset of an emergency creates the need for time
sensitive actions to save life and properties, reduce hardships and suffering, and restore
essential life support and community systems, to mitigate further damage or loss and
provide the foundation for subsequent recovery. Effective response planning requires
realistic identification of likely response functions, assignment of specific tasks to
individual response agencies, identification of equipment, supplies and personnel required
by the response agencies for performing the assigned tasks. A response plan essentially
outlines the strategy and resources needed for search and rescue, evacuation, etc.
6.2 Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for Emergency
Operation Centers (EOCs)
As one or more of the major natural calamities like drought, flood or cyclone occur every
year and bring in its trail much loss and suffering, precautionary arrangements should be
under taken to meet the eventualities and minimize the impact of these calamities. A
common feature of such preparations is the functioning of the Control Room at different
levels.
The State Emergency Operations Centre (SEOC) and District Emergency Operation
Center (DEOC) play an important role in effectively and efficiently coordinating multiagency, intergovernmental responses to disaster events. The SEOC functions in the office
of Special Relief Commissioner all round the year. Similarly, DEOC of six coastal districts
of State of Odisha normally function in the offices of Collectors round the clock and
DEOCs of rest 24 districts functions from the 1st of May to the 30th of November during
which there is likelihood of occurrence of major natural calamities like floods and
cyclones. The Emergency Operation Centers (EOCs) are to be under the operational
command of a senior officer to be nominated by the concerned head of office. Drought
conditions may also develop in case of erratic and inadequate rainfall in which case the
EOCs may function also beyond November.

The function of the EOCs is to collect and disseminate information regarding
matters relating to the natural calamities and for processing and communicating all such
data to concerned quarters. The EOCs are manned round the clock during the peak period
of emergency till the relief operations are over. The officer-in-charge of the EOC, usually
known as the Officer-on-Special Duty, maintains a station diary and such other records as
may be prescribed by the Head of Office. The particulars of all information received and
actions taken are entered in the Station Diary hour by hour for every date. The officer-incharge furnishes a daily report to the Head of Office on the important messages received
and actions taken thereon. The Head of Office indicates the particulars to be released for
public information.
Departments of Government and Heads of Departments connected with Relief
measures also open Control Rooms in their Departments and Offices and issue instructions
for the functioning of such Control Rooms in their sub-ordinate offices where necessary. If
necessary detailed instructions may be issued by the Board of Revenue / Special Relief
Commissioner for running of Control Rooms in offices of Heads of Departments and in all
sub-ordinate offices in the State.
6.3 SOP of Departments to respond to various disasters
6.3.1 Agriculture and Farmers Empowerment Department
Agriculture in Odisha is the mainstay of majority of the populace and thus, holds the key to
socio-economic development of the State. The State has cultivated area of 61.80 lakh
hectares out of which 29.14 lakh hectares is high land, 17.55 lakh hectares medium land
and 15.11 lakh hectares low land. The State is broadly divided in to 4 Physiographic zones
those are further subdivided into 10 agro-climatic zones. Further, about 4 lakh hectares is
exposed to saline inundation, 3.54 lakh hectares to flooding and 0.75 lakh hectares to
water-logging, particularly in the deltaic areas. With more than 2/3rd of crops grown rain
fed, a good harvest is much dependent on a favourable monsoon.
The climate of the State is tropical characterised by high temperature, high
humidity, medium to high rainfall and short and mild winters. The normal rainfall of the
State is 1451.2 mm. The actual rainfall received, vary from district to district. About 84%
of rainfall is received during the period from June to September. Even though the quantum
of rainfall is quite high, its distribution during the monsoon period is highly uneven and
erratic. As a result, flood, drought and cyclone visit regularly with varying intensity. The
frequent occurrence of these natural calamities badly affects the production of Khariff rice,

the major crop of the State. Similarly, in drought years, there is considerable loss in
production of Pulses and Oilseeds both during Khariff and Rabi. These, stand as stumbling
blocks in the way of enhancing crop production and productivity. Agriculture sector is
highly vulnerable to natural disasters like flood, cyclone, saline inundation, tsunami,
hailstorm and drought etc. The Department of Agriculture makes elaborate plans for
management of disasters affecting the sector. The response arrangements are made at
State, district and below level under the overall command and control of the Department.
6.3.1.1 Disaster Specific Response Plan Table: 6.1
Sl.
No.
Disasters Responsibility Response Time
line
Who is responsible
1 Flood Estimate of Area
under
Submergence/
inundation/ Sand
Cast
24 hours RI /ARI &VAW/AO at GP
level
Tahasildar & AAO at block
level
Collector & DDA at District
level
Director Agriculture Food
Production, Agriculture
Department, Revenue and
DM Department at state level
Assessment of
Damage
After 7 days
of submergence/
receding of
flood
-Do2 Drought/
Moisture
Stress
Area under
moisture stress
At regular
intervals during
the cropping
season
-Do3 Cyclone/
Hailstorm/
Tidal waves
Area affected by
submergence/
saline
inundation/ sand
cast/ lodging of
crops etc
Immediate after
occurrence
-Do4 Pest & Disease
attack
Area affected 24 hours in case
of emergencies/
as Monitored
through e-pest
surveillance
On a weekly
basis.
VAW/AO at GP level
AAO at block level
DDA/PPO at District level
DDA (Plant Protection) at
State Level

Crop production in the state is much dependent on the Monsoon. Thus everyday
rainfall is recorded at the block headquarters and evaluated for impact on crop stand.
Natural disasters are closely watched, especially during kharif season, since 2/3rd of the
crops are grown rainfed. Weekly crop weather watch reports are generated on-line and
transmitted by each district to the Control Room at the Directorate. The Control room
functions every day from 8 AM to 8 PM and such incoming reports are monitored. Regular
monitoring of crop weather reports at least once every week at the state level gives a firsthand indication of occurrence of natural calamities. However, in case of flash floods/
cyclones/ hailstorms etc the entire reporting system is activated almost immediately and
first hand (eye estimate) reports of damage generated within 24 hours. Basing on the
reports from the respective districts the response mechanism as regards technical support,
agri-input supply, pest and disease outbreak measures are kept in readiness. The
amelioratory measures start as soon as possible after the extent of damage is assessed in
real time basis. The extension functionaries at the grass root level take a note of the
damages and report them almost every day during such an emergency.
6.3.2 Water Resource Department
Pre-flood maintenance of flood infrastructure and flood preparedness before the onset of
monsoon plays a vital role in the smooth management of high flood situations. When the
river is in spate, the embankment requires close and constant watch and unremitting day
and night supervision by adequately trained staff and officers. Efficient and constant
patrolling with timely warning and timely action alone can avert a situation leading to
disaster. During this period inspection by the senior officials will have to be carried out
systematically and all the officers concerned and staff will have to remain alert to meet any
emergent situation. The establishment required for this purpose will vary depending upon
importance of the embankment and behavior of the river. The temporary headquarters of
the Junior Engineer, Assistant Engineer, Assistant Executive Engineer and Executive
Engineer are to be located near the vulnerable and important reaches of the embankment
under his/her charge.
6.3.2.1 Duties and responsibilities of the officers for smooth management
of the flood
Assistant Engineer/Junior Engineer.
An Assistant Engineer/ Junior Engineer (AE/JE) is responsible for efficient flood
management within his/her jurisdiction. A high level of alertness and resourcefulness are

expected from the AE/J E for the above purpose. He should essentially be faithful to the
Government and get thoroughly involved in all activities and discharge his duties
sincerely. He is entrusted with the following responsibilities.
Pre-flood measures
 Identification of vulnerable points, weak embankments and other problematic areas.
 Survey, investigation and preparation of estimates for raising and strengthening of
embankments to design section, treatment of all piping points noticed during
previous floods as per records maintained in the register, all flood protection works,
procurement of flood fighting materials required for the embankments in his charge
by 20th April.
 He/She will see that all departmental vehicles, boats, lunches are in working
condition. He will also arrange all tools and equipment like torch, hurricane lamps,
spades, etc. by 15th May.
 His/Her duty comprises timely and efficient execution and completion of temporary
/ permanent flood protection works, repair of embankments to design section, breach
closing works, treatment of gauge posts by painting, greasing etc. and collection of
flood fighting materials at site by 1st week of June.
 The gates of all major, medium and minor dams, drainage sluice and canals are to be
checked, repaired if necessary by 1st week of June. Mock drill operation should be
carried out by the dam owners by 2nd week of June.
 The JE has to certify in the log book of gates maintained by his section office that
the maintenance and repair have already been done and all the gates are operational.
 Measurement of all the permanent / temporary flood protection works must be
recorded before the monsoon flow starts in the river or by 15th June whichever is
earlier with due acceptance of the executing agency.
 A AE/JE has to carefully record the level and slope of all the front and loop
embankments after the year’s maintenance raising is completed and keep the record
in his custody.
 He/She is responsible for the proper custody of the monsoon period materials
stacked at strategic locations. Accordingly he is to arrange necessary watch and ward
for the purpose till their utilization during flood watching.

 He/She has to display the notice boards containing the nature of vulnerability at all
the strategic locations like previous breach points, piping points, scouring points etc.
for public awareness.
Measures during flood
 AE/JE concerned with his/her field staff will keep a round the clock vigil on the
embankments during flood.
 He/She will prepare a duty chart for each embankment under his jurisdiction.
 He/She is required to see that all leaks, wave-wash action and wetting of
embankments are properly attended to and that the entire establishment is doing the
work allotted to them.
 He/She will observe the gauge readings, velocity of river flow by current meter or
floats at critical and important points along the embankment and will also note the
direction of flow during flood.
 He/She will always remain in touch with the Assistant Executive Engineer during
flood watching and apprise him of the situation.
 In case of any emergent situation like piping, overtopping, scour of embankment or
any other threat, he has to take appropriate steps to attend to the need in the absence
of higher authorities with intimation to the Assistant Executive Engineer.
 The AE/JE is to keep contact with the local bodies and NGOs for flood management
in their respective jurisdictions.
 He/She has to keep his mobile phone in operative mode during high flood for instant
communication.
 He/She has to record all the piping points in the register for permanent repair before
the monsoon of the next year.
 He/She has to mark the high flood level of the year and keep record of it’s for
reference.
Post-flood measures
 As soon as the flood approaches, the Junior/Assistant Engineer concerned has to
open the sluice gates for release of drain water.
 He/She has to assess the damages due to flood immediately through personnel
verification, prepare the flood damage report and submit the same to the Assistant
Executive Engineer as promptly as possible, not later than one week in any case.

Assistant Executive Engineer (AEE)
An Assistant Executive Engineer will remain in charge of the embankments and will be
responsible for everything that occurs in his jurisdiction. The duties and responsibilities of
the Assistant Executive Engineer in flood management are as follows:
Pre-flood measures
 The Assistant Executive Engineer concerned will inspect the embankments in his
jurisdiction to suggest to the AE/JE, the nature and type of flood protection or flood
fighting works to be taken up before monsoon and check at least 50% levels or
measurements taken by the AE/JE for preparation of all the flood preparatory
estimates. He/She shall ensure that the above estimates are prepared and submitted
to the Executive Engineer by 30th April.
 His / Her responsibility is to see that all the river embankments are repaired to
designed section, breaches are closed, gauge posts are painted before 1st week of
June.
 He / She will see that all the ongoing temporary / permanent flood protection works
are completed by 1st week of June.
 He / She will check measure all the ongoing or completed flood protection works
positively before arrival of monsoon flow in the river or latest by 15th June.
 He/She will ensure that the required flood fighting materials are collected and
stacked at strategic locations by 15th June and check at least 50% of materials. He
will make arrangement for procurement of more materials in case of exigency.
 He will ensure that all the gates are made functional and the drains are cleared of silt
and vegetation by 1st week of June.
 The Assistant Executive Engineer will certify in the log book of gates maintained by
the AE/JE that the maintenance and repair have already been done all the gates are
operational and submit the copy to the Executive Engineer.
 He will check at least 50% of the free board statement prepared by the AE/JE and
give a certificate that he has satisfied himself with regard to the correctness of the
level of the top and of all flood embankments and submit the copy to the Executive
Engineer.
Measures during flood
 The Assistant Executive Engineer concerned will remain in touch with the local
bodies, NGOs for community participation during flood fighting.

 His/Her establishment during flood watching consists of Junior/Assistant Engineers,
Work Mistries, Work Sarkars, Mates and Khalais.
 He/She will arrange proper distribution of patrol establishment for due discharge of
duties keeping in view to various needs at different points.
 He/She will remain in contact with his Junior/Assistant Engineers and keep himself
in touch with up-to-date conditions of the embankments and river in his charge.
 During high floods the Assistant Executive Engineer will visit the embankments
continuously so that he can keep watch on the patrolling staff and find out the
problems for taking immediate measures.
 Apart from engaging of patrols, he/she will keep one or two teams reserved at
convenient place for employment when emergency arises.
 It is the duty of the Assistant Executive Engineer to inform about the situation to the
Executive Engineer everyday and to make suggestions for the efficient management
of flood.
 The Assistant Executive Engineer will encourage the participation of N.G.Os and
local bodies for watch and ward and flood fighting during flood.
 In case of occurrence of any breach or overtopping, the Assistant Engineer will at
once inform the Executive Engineer, Superintending Engineer, Chief Engineer and
local/district administration for taking immediate precautionary measure for the
safety of the lives and property of the local people.
 During the entire flood period, the Assistant Engineer will have to keep his mobile
phone in operative mode for direct communication.
Post-flood measures
The Asst. Executive Engineer has to verify and consolidate the flood damage reports
submitted by the AEs/JEs and submit the same to the Executive Engineer
immediately.
Executive Engineer
 An Executive Engineer is the officer, fully responsible for smooth flood
management of his jurisdiction. The duties and responsibilities of the Executive
Engineer during flood are as follows.

Pre-flood measures
 The Executive Engineer concerned will inspect all embankments, sluices, gauge
stations, flood protection works and cross check the flood fighting materials kept in
readiness by the end of 15th June. He will satisfy himself about the arrangement and
report to the Superintending Engineer.
 He will check some of the gates at random and countersign on the certificate of the
log book and submit copies of the same to the Superintending Engineer before 1st
week of June.
 He will countersign the certificate of free board statement of all embankments with a
minimum check of 10% and submit the copy to the Superintending Engineer for
record.
 He should be vigilant and keep track of flood situation at all the vulnerable points
under his jurisdiction.
 During high floods the Executive Engineer has to make contact with S.E./C.E. and
District Administration and inform them about the flood situation at different
locations at regular intervals. The interval is to be reduced depending on the
seriousness of the situation.
 The Executive Engineer concerned will have to take immediate steps for flood
fighting measures, when he suspects that an abnormal condition may occur and
intimate the District Administration and Superintending Engineer.
 For anticipated inundation of the low-lying area, the Executive Engineer has to
inform the local/district administration for immediate evacuation of the people to
safe places in advance.
Measures during floods
 In case of occurrence of any breach or overtopping, the Executive Engineer will
immediately inform the District Collector to provide immediate relief and undertake
rescue operation for the affected population with intimation to the Superintending
Engineer and Chief Engineer. If possible, the Executive Engineer will take steps for
temporary closing of the breach.
 He will always be available for ready communication through his mobile phone.
Post-flood measures
 Damage reports will be consolidated and communicated to S.E. and Collector
concerned for necessary action.

Superintending Engineer
 The Superintending Engineer concerned is the controlling officer for repair and
maintenance of the flood embankments. He will monitor the watch and ward of the
entire length of embankments of his circle and will remain responsible for all
occurrences.
 He will inspect some of the flood protection works, all vulnerable points, all breach
closing and repair works of embankments at random positively by end of 15th June
and will issue instructions to the field staff for any remedial measures required and
furnish a report to the Chief Engineer mentioning the overall flood preparedness
relating to his circle.
 He will keep record of free board statement of all embankments under his control. A
graph would be drawn to compare the actual top level and the ground level with the
highest flood level of the previous year and the other flood years at an interval of
one kilometer.
 He will make additional arrangement for flood watching wherever needed by
deputing technical staff from other places within his circle.
 He may place requisition for additional technical staff to the Chief Engineer for
smooth flood management if he feels, serious shortage of staff.
 He will not leave the head quarters during high flood. In such a situation, if he wants
to leave the head quarters due to any unavoidable reason, he will take prior
permission of the Chief Engineer before leaving the head quarters.
 The Superintending Engineer concerned will be in touch with the Chief Engineer at
hourly intervals and apprise him of the latest developments after receiving message
from the Executive Engineers.
 After receiving message of any abnormal incident, which has occurred or about to
occur from the Executive Engineer, he has to rush to the site and suggest appropriate
measures to manage it efficiently with intimation to the Chief Engineer.
 He will always make himself available during the high flood through his mobile
phone.
 Immediately after recession of each flood, the Superintending Engineer will submit a
detailed report to the Chief Engineer about the extent of damage and the
approximate cost of their restoration after consultation with the Executive Engineers
concerned.

Chief Engineer / Chief Engineer & Basin Manager (CE & BM):
The Chief Engineer & Basin Manager, Lower Mahanadi Basin is the reporting officer in
the flood situation for the entire state and is directly responsible to the Government. The
field Chief Engineers / CE & BMs are the reporting officers for the area under their
jurisdiction.
 The Chief Engineer will make random visit to vulnerable points in order of
importance basing on the report of the Superintending Engineers and furnish a brief
report on flood preparedness to the D.O.W.R /S.R.C/ CE&BM, LMB.
 He may depute some Executive Engineers, Assistant Engineers or Junior Engineers
working in the unaffected areas with no flood duty to the divisions having important
and dangerous vulnerable points to serve as additional hand during high flood after
getting requisition from the Superintending Engineers.
 The Chief Engineer will always be in touch with Government during flood watching
and intimate the developments to the Government.
 During flood in any river, the Chief Engineer will be in constant touch with the
CWC, IMD and directly monitor the situation.
 He will keep in constant touch with the field officers on flood duty and control the
system from the control room.
 He will collect information on the status of reservoirs within the State and those of
other States for interstate rivers.
 In case of any abnormal incident, which has either occurred or is about to occur, the
Chief Engineer will jointly inspect the site with the concerned S.E. and suggest
immediate measures to manage it efficiently.
 Immediately after receipt of message about occurrence of any breach or
submergence of the embankment, the Chief Engineer will intimate to the D.O.W.R. /
S.R.C with details of the location, the time of occurrence, nature of damage for relief
and rescue operation.
After each flood, the Chief Engineer will submit a detailed report to the Govt. mentioning
the cause of the flood, the extent of damage and the approximate cost of their restoration
as early as possible.

6.3.3 Department of Health & Family Welfare
6.3.3.1 Emergency Response at State & District level Table: 6.2
Immediate
(0-2 hrs)
Intermediate Response
(2- 6 hrs)
Rapid Assessment
Intermediate Response
(6-12 hrs)
Extended
Response
(12-24 hrs)
State/District
Disaster response
steering committee
meeting,
State/District
Technical task
force meeting
-Activation of chain of
commands from state to
village level.
-Activation of Health
surveillance systems
control rooms & State,
District & Block RRTS
Collection and analysis of
information available
through health surveillance
control rooms, Casualty
and laboratory systems,108
service centers at
Block/District/State/ MCH
Address
local
emergency
case
manageme
nt, early
referral,
relocation
of
resources,
mental and
behavioral
health
support
needs
Assessing the
magnitude of
impact
Activation of
OT,LR,ICU,
SNCU,NCU, X-ray unit,
Blood Bank, Laboratory
functionality at CHC/
SDH/ DHH/ MCH/
PVT Hospitals
(accredited)
Prepare and update
information for shift
change and executive
briefings.
-Quick assessment of the
available resources and
proposal and supply of the
requirement as per need to
the affected area.
Prepare for
transition
to extended
operations
or response
disengage
ment
Resource mapping Population at risk
including vulnerable
population
Prepare for state / National
/ international assistance
Planned
distribution
of
available
resources
and the
assistance
obtained
Sharing of
information with
other concerned
departments (RD,
H&UD, PRI,
School & ME,
W&CD, Revenue,
Coordinating risk
communication
messages, Networking
with other hospitals/
related Depts., agencies,
Health related
volunteers Org
-Assess and acquire health
resources as per need
-Proposal for specific
assistance and need based
interventions in the
affected area
Roles &
responsibili
ties of each
department
needs to be
defined

Food & supplies,
Industry, Mines,
Works, transport,
Fire, Police,
RWSS,OSDMA,
Civil Defenses,
Red Cross, UNDP,
Surface transport,
National Org).
Health facility Level
 As soon as any information is received regarding disaster, the CDMO
immediately convenes a meeting of Disaster Committee members to discuss the
different modalities of operation for the mass casualty incident.
 CDMO himself becomes the Incident Commander and coordinates all the activity
from the control room located at ADMO (PH) Office or ADMO (Med) Office.
ADMO (PH) is second in command or the operation Chief in Charge supported
by a team assigned with different roles and responsibilities during flood
cyclone/epidemics. While ADMO (Med) is the second in command supported by
ADMO(PH) and other team members such as for Transportation in charge, Store
– in charge, Liasoning Officer, Logistic chief, Planning & coordination chief etc.
during any disaster with mass casualty.
 Immediately one ambulance with a team of MOs, Pharmacist, Staff Nurse,
attendant is dispatched to the site of Occurrence. Information is also sent to the
nearby CHC/SDH/DHH from within or outside district to reach the spot.
 A control room is opened in the office of ADMO (Med) for all the necessary
communication, case management, referral & coordination with other related
Depts.( Blood bank, Radiology, Pathology)
 Control room has telephone, computer, printer, e-mail for transmission of
information to the higher level and other related deptt. The list of contact numbers
of Medical Officers &Paramedics of the hospital along with Police, Fire services,
water, Electricity, Blood Bank, NGOs, Private Physicians are available with
ADMO (Med).
 Immediately Inter Sectoral coordination is established with other related deptt.
like Police, fire services Red Cross, Corporate & private hospital, ambulance

services, NGOs, Voluntary Organization, Water, Electricity, Sanitation Deptt.,
Civil Defense, ESI, Railways, transport etc to seek their assistance
 ADMO (Med) alerts ADMO (Med)/Specialists in Surgery /Orthopedics
/Anesthesia /other ancillary staffs for the emergency
 Verification of preposition of drugs/logistics/other supplies, deployment of MOs
& Paramedics, status of basic life support equipments, Operation Theater are
being kept in readiness.
On Site:
 The cases are triaged by the attending doctor team on the site. The cases are
screened, minor injuries are given first aid, and prioritized cases are given
preliminary treatment and then referred to nearby DHQ
hospital/secondary/tertiary care. This depends upon the number of casualty and
site of occurrence. After further resuscitation and stabilization of the cases they
are further referred to nearby accredited hospital, if required.
 When the number of mass casualty are overwhelming, one Medical Relief Center
is opened in a Govt PHC/ CHC/Private/School/Panchayat Office for immediate
management
 Mobile Medical Units with advanced life support systems & team of Doctors are
being sent to the site.
 Ambulances, 108 ambulances, other mode of transports are being used for
transportation of cases to nearby hospitals after triage at the site camp.
 The nearby CHC/SDH/DHH of parent district or neighbor district supports in
triaging & transport of cases to nearby hospital for resuscitation and stabilization.
At Hospital:
 When the disaster affected patient arrives doctor on duty at casualty receives and
attends to them. After examination the case is re triaged and send to the ward or
given treatment for minor injuries and discharged or else referred to the next
higher health facility if required by the attending doctor team.
 The OPD /IPD Deptt. is being alerted regarding the incident and more MOs are
pulled from other wards to manage the ongoing situation.
 Separate wards/beds are arranged on priority basis to address the surge of
casualty.

 If the Mass casualties extend beyond 24 hours, MOs are deployed from other
areas within and outside the district.
 Reception area with registration facility and help desks are opened nearer to the
casualty.
 Patient Resuscitation area is located in the casualty where priority 1 (seriously
injured) patients are treated and stabilized immediately.
 Patient Observation area is located in the casualty where priority patients are kept
for some time before getting definitive management
 Minor Treatment area: This area is the dressing room located near the casualty
where the priority 3 (walking wounded) can be managed and discharged.
 Operation Theatre: When disaster is declared, all the elective cases are
deferred and OT is prepared for emergency victims.
 Organization of Wards: To vacate some Emergency ward, Surgery ward &
Orthopedic ward will be required vacate some beds of elective patients by
temporarily discharging them. In case some other beds are vacant, these patients
can be taken up those beds.
 Organization of the Mortuary: The ADMO (Med)/Med Superintendent along
with the mortuary services organizer will arrange for the preservation of the dead
bodies.
 Organization of Patient Transfer after stabilization: Patient who cannot be
further treated is transferred to higher secondary/tertiary care hospital/accredited
hospital by 108 ambulances for further treatment.
Operational Planning at Hospital Table: 6.3
Area Person responsible /
Consumables/logistics
Work assigned
Registration area/
Triage Area
-Registration Officer on desk
-Triage Doctors/Nurses
- Adequate nos. of MOs in Emergency
room
-Adequate trolleys/stretchers/wheel chairs
- Hospital attendants
- Stocks of essential & life saving drugs,
IV fluids
- Registration of case
-Screening by Triage
Criteria (1,2,3)
1. Severe injury
2. Moderate Injury
3. Mild injury
2.Emergency Deptt - Casualty MO/Doctor in Emergency
Charge
Retriage, Emergency case
management, referral of

- Oxygen, IV Fluids, lifesaving drugs cases to related Deptt/
higher referral Centers
3.Definitive Care (OT
ICU, SNCU, LR, NCU
, WARDS)
Surgeon Special/Ortho. Specialist /Neuro
Surgeon/Cardiac Surgeon/other clinicians
Case management &
referral to higher center
4.IntensiveTreatment
area Activation (ICUs)
Head of Anesthesiology / Critical
Care/Medicine
Case management
5.Minor Treatment
Areas
Nurses, attendants familiar with first aid,
splinting & dressing
First Aid &Discharge
6. Holding areas for
relatives/Non injured
Social service providers/NGOs/CBOs Counseling and support in
case referral, crowd
management
7.Decontamination
Area
If needed as per Protocol As per guideline BMWM
8. Essential ancillary
services (Lab,
Radiology, Pharmacy,
radiology services,
blood bank)
-Deployment or reallocation of HWs, Staff Nurses, radiographer
Lab Tech, Pharmacist/ nursing staff from
Other non-affected areas
9.Mortuary Service Mortuary In Charge, & a forensic
Personnel
-Dead body preservation
(Dead On
Arrival),Disaster tagging
-Record maintenance
10. Hospital Dietary
System
Kitchen staff Diet Provision to
ambulatory in house
patients
11. Sanitation Services Ward attendants/Sweepers Clean hospital linen,
sterile dressing
12. Hospital Laundry
& Sterile Supply
Laundry in charge Clean hospital linen,
sterile dressing
13. Water/electricity Public Health Engineering Deptts.
Electricity Department
Maintenance of Water &
Electricity Supply
14 Staff education &
Trg.
MOs, ADMO PH, State Health officials
15. Disaster drills DPH/CDMO/ADMO PH
6.3.4 Factories and Boilers
After getting information about any chemical accident, the Zonal Asst. Directors of
Factories & Boilers shall inform the Divisional Dy. Director of Factories & Boilers and in
turn shall intimate to the Director of Factories & Boilers. The State, Divisional and Zonal

Control Rooms of the concerned locality shall be activated to function round the clock.
The concerned Asst. Director of Factories & Boilers shall be the nodal officers for
effective communication to different levels.
The concerned Zonal Asst. Director of Factories & Boilers shall rush to the site,
take a stake of the entire situation and shall ensure effective implementation of the On Site
Emergency Plan. He will also coordinate with the other mutual aid teams to help in
mitigation of the disaster.
All official staff shall be asked to remain at their respective headquarters with
necessary preparation as per the standard operating procedure.
The Control Room will collect, collate and transmit information regarding matters
related to chemical accidents, rescue measures undertaken and relief thereof extended (if
any) for processing and communicating all such data to the concerned quarters. A station
diary shall be maintained in the control room to record each and every activity received
chronologically. The Zonal Asst. Director of Factories & Boilers shall furnish information
to the Head office on the important messages received as and when and action taken
thereof. He shall also appraise the Dist. Administration about such chemical accidents and
the measures required to be taken by the management and Dist. Administration.
Constitution of the Incident Response Teams (IRTs) at all level with provision of
delegation of authority:
Incident Response Teams will be constituted at state, Division and Zonal level to tackle
any disaster.
Role of the Zonal Incident Response Team:
 To maintain an inventory of hazardous chemicals stored / handled /used in the
factories and a Zonal map of such industries with the important contact numbers
of the key members.
 First hand information on the disaster.
 To coordinate with Dy. Director of the Division, Director and Dist. Authority.
 To activate Disaster Management Plan.
 To coordinate the overall response activities in the field.
 To coordinate with other mutual partners to extend mutual aid to develop the
media messages regarding up to date status of disaster mitigation and response
work.

 To collect, store and forward disaster related information for post incident
analysis.
Role of the Divisional Incident Response Team:
 To coordinate with Director and other line departments.
 To advise the field officer (Nodal officer) for declaring the disaster.
 Visit the spot and assess the Zonal Response Team for pre-disaster planning.
 Assess the staff and other logistic requirement for monitoring effectiveness.
 To ensure availability of funds at Zonal level to meet contingency expenses.
 To develop the media messages regarding up to date status of disaster mitigation
and response work.
 To monitor and guide the Zonal Incident Response Team.
Role of State Incident Response Team:
 To coordinate with State Govt., Central Govt., and other Line Departments.
 To facilitate execution of orders for declaring the disaster.
 To prepare a status report regarding the disaster.
 Visit the spot and assist the Zonal and Divisional Incident Response Teams for
pre-disaster planning.
 Assess the staff and other logistic requirement for field operation and monitor
effectiveness.
 To ensure availability of funds at Zonal and Divisional level to meet contingency
expenses.
 To develop the media messages regarding up to date status of disaster mitigation
and response work.
 To document the lessons learnt at different stages of disaster management and
make suggestions for necessary addition and alternation.
Members of State Incident Response Team: Table: 6.4
Sl.
No.
Officer Role
1. Director of Factories & Boilers, Odisha Chairman
2. Jt. Director of Factories & Boilers, Level-I Vice-Chairman
3. Jt. Director of Factories & Boilers, Level-II Member

4. Dy. Director of Factories & Boilers, Safety,
Headquarters
Convener
5. Asst. Director of Factories & Boilers, Safety Member
6. Asst. Director of Factories & Boilers, Headquarters Member
7. Asst. Director of Factories (Medical) Member
8. Establishment Officer Member
6.3.5 Food Supplies and Consumer Welfare Departments
6.3.5.1 Response Plan:
Pre Disaster: Mechanism for Early Warning Dissemination:
After getting warning from State authorities or District Administration, information is
disseminated to field by the State/District Incident Response Team. Mass media like TV,
Radio and Press are also considered for warning communication.
The State and District Control room are activated to function round the clock in
the concerned district. The State IRT furnishes the status report about the establishment of
control room at district level. Civil Supply Officer is responsible to provide all support to
control room at district level.
Trigger mechanism for response:
After issue of early warning, Civil Supply Officer of the vulnerable districts explains the
detailed response plan at district level meeting of District disaster management authority
constituted in every district in conformity with GoI guideline for planning, coordinating
and implementing various activities.
Response Plan for Responding Effectively and Promptly:
The CSOs of non- vulnerable districts prepare 3 separate teams of IS& PI (up to 30 % of
total strength) for deployment to the affected area at the request of State IRT. The first
team is replaced after 7 days by second team and so on. All the field staff are asked to
remain at their respective headquarters with necessary preparation as per the standard
operating procedure.
The control room collects, collate and transmit information regarding matters
relating to the natural calamities and relief operations undertaken, if any, and for
processing and communicating all such data to concerned quarters. The list of volunteers

and community resources that is already available is kept in readiness to support response
measures.
The Control Room is manned round the clock during the peak period of disaster
till the relief operations are over. For this purpose one officer, one assistant and one peon
are on duty in suitable shifts. The Officer-In-Charge of the Control Room maintains a
station diary and such other records as may be prescribed by the department. The
particulars of all information received and actions taken are entered in the Station diary
chronologically.
The CSO furnishes a daily report to the head of office on the important messages
received and actions taken thereon. The head of office indicates the particulars to be
released for public information.
Appointment of Nodal Officers to Perform Emergency Support Functions:
The Civil Supplies Officer is the nodal officer at the district level to perform emergency
support functions. M.D., OSCSC Ltd. is the nodal officer at state level and he is supported
by Controller. OSCSC ltd. serves as a support agency for supply of food grains during the
disaster. The department also assists the district administration for assessing food grain
requirement of people in the affected areas. The district administration provides necessary
technical support for timely distribution of food grains in affected areas.
Constitution of the Incident Response Teams (IRTs) at all levels:
Incident Response Team is constituted at State and District level to tackle any disaster.
Role of the District Incident Response Team are:-
 To coordinate with Department, OSCSC, Food Aid Agencies (WFP) and District
Authority
 To activate Disaster Management Plan.
 To prepare Food Aid plan and procure required resources as per incident specific
action plan.
 To manage the overall response activities in the field.
 To deploy adequate staff for the response and monitor effectiveness.
 To develop the media messages regarding up to date status of disaster mitigation
and response work.
 To procure necessary food stock necessary for response measures.
 To collect and store disaster related information for post incident analysis.
 To visit the affected areas to assess the extent of damage.

Role of the State Incident Response Team are:-
 To coordinate with State Government, Central Government, Food Aid Agencies
and other concerned Departments.
 To facilitate execution of orders for declaring the disaster.
 To prepare a status report regarding the disaster.
 Visit the spot and assist the District Response Team for pre disaster planning.
 Assess the staff and other logistic requirement for field operation and monitor
effectiveness.
 To ensure availability of funds at District and block level to meet contingency
expenses
 To develop the media messages regarding up to date status of disaster mitigation
and response work
 To arrange necessary food stock necessary for response measures
 To monitor and guide the district response team
 To maintain an inventory of all related guidelines, procedures, action plans,
district maps and Contact numbers.
 To document the lessons learnt at different stages of disaster management and
make suggestion for necessary addition/alteration.
IRT at State level for FS & CW Deptt. Table: 6.5
Sl. No Post Role
1 M.D., OSCSC Ltd. Chairman
2 Addl. Secy., FS & CW Deptt. Member
3 Controller, Legal Metrology Member
4 Joint Secy., FS & CW Deptt. Member
5 Dy. Secy., FS & CW Member -Convenor
6 GM-PDS, OSCSC Member
7 Dy. Director, FS & CW Dept. Member
8 Dy. Controller, Legal Metrology Member
9 Manager, Storage, OSCSC Member
10 Manager, Procurement Member
IRT at State level meets at least twice in a year. 1st meeting in 2nd week of December and

nd meeting in 2nd week of May.

IRT at each District level for FS& CW Deptt.
Sl. No Post Role
1 DM-cum-CSO Chairman
2 ACSO, Hqrs. Convenor
3 Accounts Manager, OSCSC Member
4 Selected ACSOs and Inspector of Supplies (5) Members
6.3.6 Forest and Environment Department
The response to forest fire can be generated after a steady detection of the fire which is
generally through methods such as voluntary reporting by VSS members, fire protection
squad or villagers
 Ground patrolling
 Fire watch towers
 Aerial detection and remote sensing- The national remote sensing agency sends
reports by acquiring the MODIS data daily during the day time depicting the toposheet number, latitude, longitude, district, date of occurrence etc to facilitate field
verification immediately(INFFRAS- Indian Forest Fire Response and Assessment
system).
 Communication through wireless messages, mobile phones, fire messengers etcAfter reaching the spot as fast as possible, the fuel type, values at stake, rate of spread
must be determined for most economic and adequate control of the Forest Fire. Fire
Control Planning is actually a process of continuous revision and refinement as per
lessons learnt. A held line is formed faster than the fire makes perimeter. Then the
fires extinguished by the following processes.
By fire broom and green boughs- Designed for beating the fire and made up of stainless
steel wires reinforced with a steel cup connected to a club with an adjustable handle.
Fire Beater- It is used to put off fire hidden in lumps, made up of fire proof material with
wooden adjustable handle.
Fire Rake- Used for cutting of fire lines. Consists of peg toothed blade with adjustable
handles.

Indian Fire Pump- It is portable back pack fire pump and holds about 23 liters of water
which can be filled quickly and easily. It can throw water up to 13 meters and has an
adjustable spray straight stream tip.
Back pack blower- It is a portable blower which can blow air 360 km/hr blast from the
nozzle. It consists of petrol driven motor. It is used for backfiring and creation of fire lines.
Use of Chemicals- Chemicals such as Sodium Carboxyl methyl cellulose, Bentonite Clay,
Potassium Chloride, sodium Bicarbonate, Ammonium Phosphate, Ammonium Sulphate,
Boric Acid, Sodium Acetate, Calcium Chloride, Phosphoric Acid etc are used as
SUPPRESSANTS and RETARDANTS for reducing the flame and rate of spread of fire
respectively. The latter is applied ahead of the fire to reduce its spread.
Use of Water and Fire tender- Sometimes during severe fires on forests situated at road
sites, fire tender is used to extinguish forest fire & prevent them from spreading. Water is
sometimes sprayed through water tankers to extinguish the fire and check its spread. But it
is seldom used by spraying it parallel to the fire at road points.
Use of Wet Gunny Sack-This is used for the cooling of the edge of the fire in advance of
fire line construction.
Nodal Officers for emergency support operations- Each Division is headed by a
Divisional Forest Officer, who will act as the nodal officer at the district level for the
Emergency support operations in case of Forest Fire. He will be responsible for drafting
the Divisional Fire Management plan and will seek the assistance of the District
Administration and other line departments in case of an emergent situation. Funds will be
placed to the DFOs for various activities for combating the forest fires and the aftermath.
A forest Fire Control room will be in operation at the State level in the office of the
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests from the month of February till May of each year.
The Addl. Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Protection and Sustainable
Management) will act as the nodal officer on behalf of the Principal Chief Conservator of
Forests at the State level-and closely monitor the functioning of the Control room and
render necessary assistance in case of an emergent situation.
Incident Response Teams (IRTs):
At Division level- will comprise of the following officers-
 Divisional Forest Officer- Team leader
 Chief District Medical Officer- Member
 Asst. Conservator of Forests (Hqrs)- Member

 Dy. Collector Emergency- Member
 Dist. Fire Officer- Member
At Range level-
 Range Officer- Team Leader
 Dy. Range Officer- Member
 Forester- Member
 Forest Guard- Member
6.3.7 Fisheries and ARD Department
6.3.7.1 Response Measures during Disaster
i) Activities on Receipt of Warning:
Immediately after receipt of forecast information on the occurrence of disaster like
cyclone, flood etc. Chief District Veterinary Officer will alert the field functionaries to take
necessary steps. Mass media like TV, Radio, Press warning can also be considered for the
purpose. Within the affected District/Sub-division/Block all available personnel will be
informed to remain in readiness.
ii) Control Room functioning:
The Control Room functions both at State and District level for proper monitoring of
disaster related activities. The state level Control Room shall function at the Directorate &
the Deputy Director Disease Control will be the Nodal Officer in the state Control Room.
The functions of the Control Room are
 To collect, collate and transmit information relating to the natural calamities.
 To keep up to date data on relief operations undertaken
 To process and communicate all such data to concerned quarters
 To maintain the Station Dairy Register at Control Room
 To maintain detail of telephone calls received along with messages and actions
taken thereof.
 To ensure running of Control Room 24 hours with required roster arrangement
The Control Room shall furnish a daily report to the head of office on the
important messages received and actions taken thereon. The State control room will
furnish compiled information to Government every day.

The state control room shall appraise the status report with the state level IRT of the
department and seek advice on important issues and communicate it back to district
control rooms/ district level IRTs.
iii) Assessment of situation:
Assess the situation and review the response mechanism in vulnerable pockets. The
District Incident Response Team (IRT) will ensure availability of veterinary staff in
disaster affected area. If required, IRT will seek assistance from State control room for
deployment of staff from nearby areas.
iv) Cattle Feed and Fodder arrangement:
The Chief District Veterinary Officer will collect and compile feed/ fodder requirement
as per the SDRF norms and discuss with District Collector for bringing to the notice of
the SRC/ Directorate. District Collector will be appraised by CDVO about the amount of
Cattle Feed to be procured from OMFED/ other sources for distribution to different
Disaster affected areas as per SDRF norms.
v) Formation of Mobile Teams:
A number of mobile veterinary teams are formed consisting of dedicated and experienced
technical workers with allotment of area of operation. The teams are kept in readiness
having required stock of medicines and equipment to work in any adverse situation. A
telephone directory is maintained at the District level by collecting the telephone nos. of
Vets, Para-Vets, etc. of each mobile team to collect feedback. The District Collector will
be requested to provide the required number of vehicles for the movement of mobile
teams.
vi) Staff Management:
During disaster, no staff is normally be allowed to proceed on leave. All the staff are
sensitized and oriented perfectly to manage disaster situations successfully. Officers &
staff who are deployed from other stations to work in disaster prone area on relief duty
work for a maximum 7 days. Therefore, IRT at the State level make advance planning
and ensure replacement of staff accordingly.
vii) Rescue of livestock:
Much before the rush of flood water to flood prone areas, the livestock holders of cattle,
buffalo, sheep, goat, pig etc. are educated/ informed to let loose their domesticated
animals and birds instead of tying/ caging at a particular point. In spite of that, if animals
are not shifted, necessary arrangements are to be made in consultation with the District

Collector for provision of life saving boats for rescue of marooned animals,
transportation of feed, medicine and vaccine. In case of any untoward situation, the
matter is to be brought to the notice of BDO/ Tahasildars/ Sub Collectors/ District
Collectors seeking immediate assistance by the LI/ VAS/ AVAS/ SDVO/ CDVO. Sincere
efforts are to be made in this regard by the department through NGOs, CBOs and animal
welfare organisations to save the lives of the livestock and poultry. The small ruminants
like sheep and goat are carefully shifted to temporary sheds located in higher elevations.
Similarly, the poultry birds are shifted with the help of bamboo cages to temporary pen.
viii) Shelter of the livestock:
Temporary sheds are arranged with the help of District Collectors/ NGOs/ SPCA/ Animal
Welfare Organizations working on disaster management for housing of destitute animals.
Separate arrangements are made to house cattle, buffalo, sheep, goat, pig and poultry in
order to maintain peck order and to avoid unnecessary competition for survival. Planning
for these activities should take place on a regular basis every year prior to flood season at
village level.
ix) Provision/ distribution of Feed & Fodder:
During Disaster, the affected livestock and poultry are fed with feed and fodder either
from the established bank stated earlier or from the relief source. In order to bring down
the losses of lives arising due to non-availability of feed, a proper distribution schedule is
prepared and followed as per the need of the situation. Much attention is paid for proper
and timely distribution of feed and fodder to the needy animals. Sufficient amount of
fodder and green leaves are arranged for feeding sheep and goat. The backyard poultry
birds are supplemented with crushed maize, rice bran & wheat bran. The stray dogs are to
be fed with bread and biscuits. A good coordination with block relief team is solicited for
transport of animal and poultry feeds along with relief material of revenue department.
The distribution of animal and poultry feed is made jointly by staff of Panchyat Raj
department and veterinary department.
x) Arrangement of drinking water for animals:
All the affected livestock and poultry should have an access to clean drinking water.
Arrangements are required to be made in this regard with the help of concerned
Government functionaries of the Districts. The available water may be chlorinated if
required with help of Halogen Tablet prior to drinking by livestock and poultry.

xi) Maintenance of Sanitation:
Adequate attention is paid to disinfect the premises of temporary sheds with the help of
bleaching powder, phenol, carbolic acid etc. In no case the carcass/ cadaver should come
in contact with healthy animals rehabilitated in sheds. Arrangements should be made
accordingly.
Post Disaster:
i) De-worming:
Immediately after disaster, the animals like cattle, buffalo, sheep, goat, pig, dog and
poultry are de-wormed with suitable broad spectrum anthelmintic. This enables the
animals to regain proper health.
ii) Treatment of sick animals:
The affected injured / sick animals and birds are treated as immediately as possible as per
the requirement. The existing inventory of medicines is utilised. Once flood recedes, the
field staff/veterinary teams formed visits all the approachable villages and take up
treatment of injured and ailing animals. The veterinary teams conduct preventive
vaccinations against contagious diseases in the area.
iii) Disease Surveillance:
The Disease Surveillance Team comprising of experts from ADRI, CIL, SVL and DDL
visit regularly to the Disaster affected areas to make active surveillance about any disease
occurrence. The Disease Surveillance Team will be responsible for collection of sample
in war-foot basis, laboratory confirmation of samples and take steps for prompt disease
diagnosis to minimise the spread of infection.
iv) Disposal of Carcass:
Municipalities/ Gram Panchayats/ BDOs to take steps for removing animal carcasses
likely to become health hazards. Necessary arrangements are to be made for prompt and
easy disposal of carcasses during the Disaster and Post-Disaster period. The veterinary
teams must advise the local administration i.e. Panchayati Raj bodies and revenue
officials to take up prompt disposal of carcasses to prevent epidemics. The local LI
should keep all the records of dead livestock if any in his/her jurisdiction with all relevant
information (age, colour, sex, and preferably owners name & address) before burial.
Under no circumstances, Carcass Disposal Team (CDT) engaged either by the revenue
authorities, NGO or by Urban body should bury or dispose the dead livestock without the
consent of local LI to facilitate compensation measures if Govt. desires.

v) Loss and Damage Assessment:
A joint verification by R.I., L.I. and Local Sarpanch will assess the real loss of livestock /
shed / pen etc. Local Tahasildar will distribute the compensation as per S.R.C. code. The
local LI may come across some complaints regarding loss of livestock may be due to
heavy water current and therefore, the carcass may not be traceable. In such cases a
missing/lost profile may be maintained and a committee headed by local LI with two of
the following members should certify such incidents and forward it to proper quarters for
consideration of Ex-gratia compensation if any.
I. Local PRI member
II. Revenue Inspector
III. Village Level Workers
IV. MPCS Secretary.
The Livestock Inspector will accompany the local damage assessment committee for
assessment of loss of livestock and birds. The livestock inspector will also report the
damage to the departmental infrastructure due to disaster. The concerned VAS will
compile the information and send to SDVO. The compiled information will be sent to
CDVO and the District wise compiled report will be sent to Directorate.
6.3.8 Home
6.3.8.1 Coordination with Other Organisations:
The initial Response to a disaster is usually provided by the various “Emergency
Services” supported by number of other local authorities /agencies. Emergency Services
maintain a state of readiness so that they can provide a rapid response and alert local
authorities and services as soon as possible. There is a need to coordinate with other
organizations, which plays an active role in handling the disaster along with the police
forces. Home Secretary contacts MHA/ NDMA/ UN Agencies/ PRC, New Delhi seeking
emergency support like air support, communication support, and manpower support to
fill up the gap for effective relief and rehabilitation measures.
VERTICAL
This is the Coordination with the higher levels of authorities, e.g. in police organizations,
DIGs, IGs, DG of Police and in revenue administration with Secretaries, State Relief
Commissioners, Ministers as well as Chief Ministers so also with some international
agencies.

HORIZONTAL
• The Fire Services
• The Ambulance / Hospital Services
• The Para-Military Forces
• The Military, Navy, Air forces
• The Coast Guard Agencies
• NDRF, Munduli
• BSNL Authorities,
• SIB (Subsidiary Intelligence Bureau), Bhubaneswar
• The Civil Defence
• District Magistrate and Revenue Officials
• The Voluntary Organizations
• Nearby Industrial / Commercial Organizations etc.
Impact Phase:
Points to be remembered for the impact phase are as per the followings.
• Protect self, police personnel, police families
• Citizens taken shelter in the police station
• Protect – equipment – Communication
• Batteries charged
• Alternate VHF mast kept ready
• Vehicle-Fuel tank full
• Driver be kept on standby
• Keep a generator set, solar light, lamps kerosene oil Aston, utensils items
• Don’t keep detainees in the hazats, forward them to court or bail them out
• Take shelter in window less rooms
• Away from flying glass panes
• Keep implements ready
• Keep a tractor – very useful for cross connive mobility road clearance
• Trigger the system with telecommunication, VHF, HAM, any means of
communication for quick search and rescue and to get outside assistance.

Damage assessment / death enumeration:
The immediate damage and death assessment be made and a report be sent to the higher
quarters. SP should do the need analysis for the relief. Also take steps for identification of
the victim.
Search and Rescue (SAR):
The search and rescue operation should be carried out as soon as possible after the disaster
is passed. The first 72 hours is called the golden hours. All efforts should be made to rescue
the victims. The following point should be kept in my mind while carrying out the search
and rescue operation.
Traffic regulation:
Traffic control is important in a rescue and relief operation. It can facilitate quick
movement of relief and prevent accidental deaths. Follow the following norms for
traffic regulation.
• Regulate traffic of relief trucks, visitors, govt. officials into the affected
areas.
• Restrict movement of onlookers into the disaster area.
• Put up barricades to prevent unnecessary movements
• Demarcate prohibited areas for onlookers.
• No one should enter the disaster area with vehicles with empty fuel tanks.
(To prevent stretching of local resources)
• No one to enter the area empty hand (To prevent stretching of local
resources)
• Have a separate traffic VHF channel to control traffic movements
• Keep life line roads clear for movement of essential items.
• Remove road blocks caused by accidents, bed roads and traffic jam.
• Take care of the VVIP movements
• Plan one ways, or phase the timing of traffic in flows and out flows.
• Put up traffic pickets as the life line roads and at important crossing.
• Introduce, Highway patrol’s, life line road patrols
• Keep liaison with PWD to repair and maintain the roads wheel get damaged
due to heavy flaw of loaded relief tracks.

• Control traffic at patrol pump where relief trunks get re-fuelled by the govt.
authorities and at Block Hqrs. Ware houses, where they load and unload
relief items.
6.3.9 Department of Steel and Mines
i) Mechanism for early warning and dissemination thereof:
In each mining unit, an officer not below the rank of Asst. Mines Manager is designated
as nodal officer for the Disaster Management unit of the mine. In the event of any
disaster the nodal officer immediately intimates through phone/ e-mail to the Nodal
Officer of District Level Disaster Management Cells and describes the magnitude of the
disaster vis-a-vis the capacity of the unit to negotiate the disaster. The District Level
Disaster Management Cells initiate actions as per the nature of the disaster so reported.
ii) Trigger Mechanism for response
Sooner the information reaches the District Level Disaster Management Cell the Nodal
Officer of the Cell alerts the nearby mining units and commands them to render
necessary assistance to rescue man and machineries. He also assess the situation and
intimate the District Level Disaster Management Cells for further actions. The Cell
mobilises the Quick Response Team (QRT) to the spot of disaster for relief and rescue
operations.
iii) Response plan for responding effectively and promptly to any threatening disaster
situation or disaster in accordance with the State Plan, and in accordance with the
guidelines or directions of the National Executive Committee and the State Executive
Committee and the State Government and the SDMA:
The head of District Level Disaster Management Cells mobilises the cell for meeting the
requirements as demanded by the situation/disaster. He also assess the situation further
and if required he immediately contacts the State Executive Committee and SDMA and
seek necessary assistance from them promptly.
iv)Appointment of Nodal Officers to perform Emergency Support Functions
(ESFs)/roles in emergency in the format already circulated by the State Government:
The concerned Deputy Director Mines/Deputy Director Geology /Geologist/Mining
Officer acts as Nodal Officer in each District Level Disaster Management Cells. In case
more than one mining circle comes under the same District, DDM/ DDG/ GEOLOGIST/
MO in charge of each circle/zone will act as Nodal Officer in respect of the respective
mining circle/zone. The Nodal Officers acts independently without waiting orders from
the Director of Mines while handling mining and geological disasters. Similarly there

shall be one nodal officer in the State Level Disaster Management Cell. The District
Level Nodal Officer keeps in contact with the State Level Nodal Officer for further
assistance while negotiating a disaster. The following Emergency Support Functions are
discharged by the Nodal Officer:
a) Provide his contact number to the head of District Level Disaster Management Cell,
R&DM Department and State Level Disaster Management Cell
b) Act as convener for emergency meetings of the District Level Disaster Management
Cell.
c) Ensure mobilisation of the QRT available with the District Level Disaster
Management Cell
d) Maintain official records concerning District Level Disaster Management relating to
his mining circle.
e) Set up control room and assign officials for control room duty in consultation with
the Head of District Level Disaster Management Cell.
f) Identify staff/ manpower for on-site operation centres.
g) Make arrangement for alternative communication system, if required, in consultation
with the Director of Mines.
h) Ensure timely mobilization of resources available under the District Level
Disaster Management Cell for timely mitigation.
i) Organize mock drills and awareness programmes periodically at least twice in a
year.
j) Procure necessary machines, tools and equipments for the QRT.
Constitution of the Incident Response Teams (IRTs) at all levels with
provision of delegation of authority:
Each District Level Disaster Management Cell has an Incident Response Team under its
disposal to further strengthen the QRT. The team has provision of representations from
the respective Departments corresponding to the constitution of the District Level
Disaster Management Cell. The Incident Response Team is under the control of the head
of the District Level Disaster Management Cell, who in consultation with the Nodal
Officer deploys the IRT for disaster mitigation. After deployment of QRT by the cell in
the event of any disaster for emergency operation, the IRT is pressed into service by the
District Level Disaster Management Cell with detailed strategic instruction for
undertaking further mitigation and rehabilitation measures, like earthquake, landslide,

slope failure, subsidence in mining sector, the nodal officer of the District Level Disaster
Management Cell immediately moves for seeking necessary assistance from state and
central disaster management units. The Remote Sensing Centre of Directorate of Geology
provides spatial extent of inundated areas using pre-cyclone/flood data and post cyclone/
flood data to the District Level Disaster Management Cell for management of the event.
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) Table: 6.6
Stages Prevention Strategy
(Before)
Response Strategy
(During)
Recovery Strategy
(After)
Stage-I Identification of all
vulnerable sites prone
to various disasters
In the event of any disaster related
to mining activities, the nodal
officer of the concerned mine will
immediately contact the nodal
officer of the concerned District
Level Disaster Management Cell
intimating him about the intensity
of the disaster and mitigation
actions initiated by him.
Assessment of Damage in
terms of life and property
including livestock.
Stage-II Detailed study of
disaster prone sites
and suggesting
preventive action
The nodal officer of the District
Level Disaster Management Cell
will mobilise the Quick Response
Team (QRT) to the spot of disaster
with adequate instruction for
appropriate assistance to the
disaster victims and actions as
demanded by the situation.
The District Level Disaster
Management Cell will
prepare an action plan for
reconstruction of the
disaster affected area. This
action plan will be
forwarded to the State
Level Disaster
Management Cell for their
appraisal.
Stage-III Steps will be taken
for mitigation of the
effects of such
hazards by
undertaking geotechnical studies in
these areas at the
Directorate level and
The QRT will render all
emergency support to the mine
officials and take preventive
measures for avoiding proliferation
of the disaster to the surrounding
areas, if possible. He will also
intimate the Head of the District
Level Disaster Management Cell
The Director of Mines will
also send the report of a
multi disciplinary team on
the assessment of damage
and reconstruction thereof.

advising the
concerned
Department to take
up appropriate
ameliorative
measures.
for mobilising the Incident
Response Team (IRT) for further
assistance to the disaster affected
persons and to the area under
disaster.
Stage-IV A disaster
preparedness plan can
also be prepared by
the Directorate
depending on the
nature of hazard
involved and
transmitted to
appropriate authority.
The IRT will take actions for
providing further relief and
recovery support. This will include
evacuation to safer places, rescue,
temporary shelter, medical
assistance to the affected persons,
supply of food and drinking water
and other necessary technical
support.
The State Level Disaster
Management Cell will
finalise the reconstruction
process after assessing the
proposals of District Level
Disaster Management Cell
and multi-disciplinary
team of the Director of
Mines and accordingly
respective departments
will be mobilised for
reconstruction.
Stage-V The IRT will also take up technical
analysis of the need for disaster
mitigation and, if required seek
assistance from the State Level
Disaster Management Cell.
The entire process should
be completed within a
period of one month from
the date of disaster.
6.3.10 Panchayati Raj and Drinking Water Department
The existing hazard exposure of the state of Odisha, its people and infrastructure is very
high. In order to combat the potential threat and to mitigate multiple risks it is imperative
that a coordinated intervention through key stakeholders is put into place. The Panchayati
Raj department will initiate envisaged actions and nodal officers identified by the
department will provide necessary horizontal & vertical linkages.
These procedures shall be updated and revised every six month incorporating the new
insight experience and understanding of vulnerability & risk perceptions and disaster that
take place with the passage of time.

Standard Operating Procedure
The department with the support of SIRD will organize proper training of officers and
staff so that they can help in rescue, evacuation and relief work at different stage of
disaster. The disaster management committees at different levels will be kept ready so
that they can move to disaster site/affected area on short notice. The Standard operating
procedure shall be followed during normal times, warning stage, disaster stage and post
disaster stage. Standard Operating Procedures for the Panchayati Raj Department are
listed below:
Primary Tasks
 To coordinate with Government of Odisha and State Disaster Management
Authority.
 To coordinate the Relief Recovery operations in the wake of disasters.
 To declare and notify Disaster Situation.
Preparedness Functions
 Establish infrastructure at the district level in working order and all inventories
updated.
 Train personnel on operations.
 Ensure basic facilities for personnel who will work at district level for disaster
response.
 To coordinate the preparedness functions of all line departments.
 Establish disaster management funding mechanisms to ensure adequate resources for
preparedness work, and quick availability of resources for relief and rehabilitation
when required.
 Help DDMC with additional resources for disaster preparedness.
 On annual basis report to the OSDMA of the preparedness activities.
 Establish and activate help lines through police and district public relations office.
 Prepare a list of potential shelters with clearly specifying their capacity and check
upon their suitability for accommodating people with varying social behavior.
 Prepare a plan for the disposal of dead bodies and carcasses.
 Prepare & update inventory of resources every quarter.
Mitigation

 Ensure that funds are being allocated for disaster management.
 Ensure that structural and non-structural mitigation measures are taken at Block and
District level.
 Establish warning system between State – District and in high risk zones.
 Monitor implementation of construction norms for all types of buildings and
infrastructure.
Alert and Warning Stage
 Maintain contact with forecasting agencies and gather all possible information
regarding the alert.
 Ensure activation of State level EOC in standby mode.
 Instruct all ESFs to remain in readiness for responding to the emergency.
 Advise concerned DDMA to carry out evacuations where required, and to keep
transport, relief and medical teams ready to move to the affected areas at a short
notice.
 Dispatch field assessment teams, if required.
 Provide assessment report to the SDMA.
Response
 Coordinate and plan all activities with OSDMA
 Conduct Rapid Assessment and launch Quick Response.
 Conduct survey in affected areas and assess requirements of relief
 Distribute emergency relief material to affected population.
 Coordinate all activities involved with emergency provisions of temporary shelters,
emergency mass feeding, and bulk distribution of coordinated relief supplies for
victims of disasters.
 Prepare an evacuation plan for villages which are devastated or affected.
 Ensure the supply of food grains through the Public Distribution System.
 Prepare a list of relief items to be distributed.
 Formulate sector specific teams such as transport, material and equipment for
responding to the disaster incident.
 Prepare a transportation plan for supply of relief items.

 Convene meetings of all NGOs, Youth Clubs, and Self Help Groups operating in the
district and assign them unambiguous responsibilities for relief, recovery and
rehabilitation.
 Call for emergency meeting to take stock of the situation. Develop an action plan.
 Appoint In-charge Officers of Response base.
 Ensure damage and need assessment
Recovery and Rehabilitation
 Ensure preparation of rehabilitation plan for displaced population through PRIs.
 Organise initial and subsequent technical assessments of disaster affected areas and
determine the extent of loss and damage and volume and nature of relief required.
 Keep OSDMA informed of the situation.
 Ensure supply of food, medical supplies and other emergency items to the affected
population.
 Visit and coordinate the implement of various rehabilitation programmes.
 Coordinate the activities of NGOs in relief and rehabilitation programmes.
 Allocate funds for the repair, reconstruction of damaged infrastructure after
considering their overall loss and damage.
 Prepare an evacuation plan for population from the dangerous area / buildings as per
the advice of agencies identified for issuing warnings before, during & after the
incident.
 Ensure immediate disbursal of compensation.
Roles and Responsibilities
The flow of information before, during and after disaster is defined in the diagrams
below. Before the disaster, the SRC will instruct the Secretary, PR Department who will
direct the PD DRDA. PD DRDA will instruct the BDOs and BDOs will instruct the
Sarpanch at the GP level. At the GP level volunteers, local NGOs may be directed by the
BDO to take precautionary measures before the disaster.The flow of the information is
same during the disaster also. But after the disaster it is the role of Department only to
repair and reconstruct the damaged assets. Instruction will move from PR Department to
PD DRDAs who will instruct the respective BDOs to repair and reconstruct the assets
damaged by the disaster using the existing scheme funds.

SOP at District, Block and GP level Table: 6.7
Activities Responsibility Timeline
Flood/
Cyclone
Drought/
Heat
Wave
Tsunami/
Lightening
Manmade
Preparedness Fire Others
Mock Drill Sarpanch May January Quarterly Quarterl
y
Quarterly
Communication
from Block to GP
BDO T-3
days
T-10 days Immediate NA NA
Communication
from GP to Block
Sarpanch NA NA NA Immedi
ate
Immediate
Awareness
campaign for
disaster
preparedness
Sarpanch/
EO
April December Quarterly Quarterl
y
Quarterly
Pre-Arrangement
for evacuation
Coordination with
Inspector of
schools to use
school building as
cyclone shelters
BDO T-3
days
T-10 days Immediate NA NA
Assessing the
medical facilities
Sarpanch T-3
days
T-10 days Immediate NA NA
Arrangement of
flood/Cyclone
shelters
Sarpanch T-3
days
T-10 days Immediate NA NA
Resource Mapping
& Gap Analysis to
prevent calamity
BDO/
Sarpanch
April December NA NA NA
Medical Stock at
BNRGSK
BDO/
Sarpanch
Monthl
y
Monthly Monthly Monthl
y
Monthly
Insurance Cover
for Assets &
Livestock
Sarpanch/
EO
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Response Fire Riots/other
s

Communication
from GP to Block
Sarpanch/
EO Immediate Immediate Immediate
Evacuation to
temporary shelters
BDO/
Sarpanch/
EO
T-0
days T-0 days T-0 days T-0 days T-0 days
Ensuring drinking
water, Sanitation &
medical facilities
BDO/
Sarpanch/
EO
T-0
days T-0 days T-0 days T-0 days
T-0 days
Mobilising of relief
distribution
BDO/
Sarpanch/
EO
T-0
days T-0 days T-0 days T-0 days T-0 days
Communicate with
the district
administration for
assistance
BDO T-0
days T-0 days T-0 days T-0 days T-0 days
Post Disaster Fire Riots/
Others
Identification of
victims for
compensation
Sarpanch/
EO
T+7
days T+7 days T+7 days T+7 days T+7 days
Arrange work
under MGNREGS,
SGSY & NRLM
BDO T+7
days T+7 days T+7 days T+7 days T+7 days
Meeting fund
requirements for
Social Security,
Consumption and
economic activities
through loans from
Community
Investment Support
Fund (CISF)
PD/Collector/B
DO/
Sarpanch
T+7
days T+7 days T+7 days T+7 days T+7 days
Reconstruction of
houses through
rural housing
Schemes
BDO T+30
days
T+30
days T+30 days
T+30
days T+30 days
IAY – 95%
allocated for
construction of
houses

5% allocated for
BPL families
affected by natural
calamities
BPGY – 10% is
reserved for
household affected
due to Fire, Flood,
Riot and Elephant
Menace.
Reconstruction of
local infrastructures
through the
following Schemes
BDO T+30
days
T+30
days T+30 days T+30 days T+30 days
GGY - to fill
critical gaps in
Bijli Sadak & Pani
infrastructure for
30 districts
The Response Team
At each district there is Control Room headed by District Collector. There is District
Disaster Management Committee at the District level, Block Disaster Management
Committee at Bock Level, GP Disaster Management Committee at GP level and Village
Disaster Management C committee at the village level.
Role of the Response Team Table: 6.8
Institution Response System
Preparedness Pre- Disaster During Disaster Post Disaster
District
Control
Room
(DCR)
• Setting up control
room and ensure
round the clock
functioning
• Assigning
responsibilities to
PD, DRDA, Sub
Collectors and
BDOs
• Vehicle
arrangement
• Coordination with
NGOs
• Early warning to
fishermen
• Ensure functioning
of warning and
• Monitor
functioning
of DCR
• Coordination
with
officials
• Assigning
duties to
NGOs
• Holding
DDMC
meetings
• Dissemination
of
information
regarding
status of the
disaster and
submission of
reports to PR
Department

communication
systems
• Ensure Muck Drill
DDMC • Assign
responsibilities to
BCRCs and BDOs
• Ensure availability
of country boats
• Arrangement
of all
important
telephone
lines
• Coordinate
with district
Administratio
n on a regular
interval
BDMC • Assign
responsibilities to
all concerned
officials at the
Block level
• Ensure all
BNRGSK
buildings are
functioning
at GP and
Block level
• On receipt of
warning ask
all the staff
to join duty
immediately
• Coordinate
with DDMC
and Control
room on a
regular
interval
• Deploy staff
at the disaster
site for
evacuation
GPDMC • Ensure formation
of village level
disaster
management
groups
• Coordinate with
local NGOs
working in the
area
• Open GP
office and
other Shelters
available
• Rescue
operation and
evacuation
• Report to
Block
Immediately after receiving information about the disaster that strikes any area, the
trigger mechanism is activated and the following actions will be initiated:
• Generation of event scenario report to be sent as per the trigger
mechanism.
• Preparation of current status on life line facilities and infrastructure.
• Rapid visual assessment of damage to buildings.
• Assessment of Causalities.
• Assessment of number of displaced persons.
• Assessment of Transport requirements.
• Assessment of requirement of shelters.
• Assessment of basic need requirement of displaced persons.

• Status of search and rescue operations.
• Details and listing of missing persons.
• Assessment of type & extent of medical support for undertaking
emergency operation.
• Status of identification of stakeholders and role players for providing
supporting response and recovery operations.
• Status of activating call center for providing multiple pieces of
information to callers and relatives of victims.
Primary tasks during this phase would be:
1. Proper need assessment through village response
2. BDOs shall deploy resources to all affected sections in an equitable
manner
3. Besides food, cloth and shelter facilities such as public health and
sanitation is to be provided in shelters or camps.
4. Ensuring total transparency in distribution of relief material
5. Putting in place an objective method of assessing damage
Role of Panchayati Raj Department
Panchayati Raj Department shall assess the situation and give directions to the district
Collectors. The Department shall;
 Assess the situation by taking into consideration reports from all formal
and informal sources and decide upon the level of the disaster.
 Issue necessary direction for handling the response, relief & restoration
measures
 Call for outside support if necessary
 Raise demands for support and assistance
 Assess the resource availability and issue necessary direction for pooling
resources for speeding an effective response.
 Coordinate with civil society for supplementing the efforts of the
Department
 Monitoring and reviewing the situation on a regular basis.
In the following sections the role of DRDA, Block and GPs are highlighted in the context
of pre- disaster, during disaster and post disaster.

Role of DRDAs
 Identifying the resource gaps both physical and manpower and replenish
the same through capacity building
 Establishing synergy with local agencies including NGOs/ CBOs
 Dovetailing Risk Reduction into various development programs of state
government.
 Provision of temporary shelters for those who have lost their houses
completely, till construction of permanent housing is completed.
 Providing minimum household utility goods for all those who lost
everything.
 Provision of food and clothing.
 Making alternate arrangements for drinking water if the existing facility
has been completely damaged.
 Restoration of road, transport, electricity and communication (where
minor repairs are needed and temporary arrangements in the case of those
need reconstruction, which takes long time).
Role of BDOs
 The Block Development Officer to immediately have a meeting with all
the GP/PS members and update the block disaster preparedness and
mitigation plan and clearly specifying the roles and responsibility of each
group.
 Ensure that all the resources needed immediately as per the plan are
readily available.
 Ensuring function of control room and alert all line dept. and DMTs for
disaster.
 Early warning dissemination in the villages especially the vulnerable
groups like the fishing community, villages vulnerable to that particular
hazard.
 Stock piling of food grains for human and bovine population, medicines
like (ORS, Halogen tablets, bleaching powder) etc.

 All the resources available to be kept ready like (polythene, tarpaulins,
boat, generator, diesel/ petrol/ kerosene, transportation and communication
aids available and other necessary equipment listed in the GPs.
 Human resources like the boatman, specially trained taskforce, swimmers,
and civil defence personnel.
 Supporting GP/PS members for rescue and evacuation, stock piling and
carry out their activities effectively.
 Telephone and address of the local as well as the district and state level
functionaries is available.
 Supporting GP for their relief activities.
 Supporting for rescue and evacuation.
 Monitoring of the relief distribution.
 Coordination among various Disaster Management Teams (DMTs) at the
block level.
 Coordination between block and various line departments and DMTs.
 Coordination between the district administration and the Gram Panchayats
 Coordination between the NGOs and the CBOs working in that area
 Arrangement for relief distribution.
 Weather tracking if possible and sharing of information to GPs.
 Sending information to district.
Role of community
The plan envisages constituting village response committees in each Panchayat
comprising Sarpanch, Panchayat Secretary and Ward Members. The village committees
will constitute response teams from amongst the villagers by taking in to consideration
local needs vis-a-vis the hazard and vulnerability assessment. These response teams will
be trained as first responders to garner disaster response in the absence of outside
emergency responders. The plan envisages covering all 6801 Panchayats. The capacity
building would involve awareness raising (about hazard, risks, disaster response)
organising training (medical First-Aid, Search & Rescue, extrication from damaged
buildings, road clearance, firefighting) equipping (First-Aid kit, radio, extrication
equipment) and networking.
The plan also envisages establishing and strengthening local warning systems
holding community drills. The committee would be responsible for:

 Developing the Village Disaster Mitigation Plan
 Keeping contact with Block and all other agencies related with the issue.
 Constituting response teams for Search & Rescue, medical aid, extrication
of bodies, firefighting or for any other purpose as per village specific
needs.
 Ensuring house hold preparedness to village specific hazards.
 Identification of safe locations for temporary shelters.
 Training and capacity building of all teams.
 Resource inventory and gap identification with respect to the needs.
 Identification of vulnerable groups.
Role of Civil Society Organizations
NGOs can play a very important role in mobilizing communities and the strong linkages
which NGOs have with grassroots communities can be effectively harnessed for creating
greater public awareness on disaster risk and vulnerability, initiating appropriate
strategies for strengthening the capacity of stakeholder groups to improve disaster
preparedness, mitigation and improving the emergency response capacities of the
stakeholders. In addressing the emerging concerns of climate change adaptation and
mitigation, NGOs can play a very significant role in working with local communities and
introducing innovative approaches based on the good practices followed in other States.
NGOs can bring in the financial resources from bi-lateral and multilateral donors for
implementing pragmatic and innovative approaches to deal with disaster risk.
The department shall develop a database of NGOs and CBOs at all levels working
in the field of disaster management and emergency response and other focusing on
geographic outreach and thematic capacities of the organizations. At the State level the
capacity of identified NGOs may be built up in disaster management and emergency
response.
Role of PRIs
The PRI members can play a role of leadership in Disaster Management at all stages.
Right from the preparatory stage up to the handling of the long term development
activities for risk reduction, PRI can lead in several ways. A broad outline may include
activities like:

Pre-Disaster
 Organising awareness campaign and promoting community education
on disaster preparedness
 Articulation of community need for developing preparedness plan
through community involvement and Panchayat ownership
 Identifying the resource gaps both physical and manpower and
replenish the same through capacity building
 Establishing synergy with local agencies including NGOs/ CBOs
 Dovetailing Risk Reduction into various development programs of
national and state governments
 Encouraging people to insure assets and livestock
 Establishing convergence with local institutional structures created for
implementing education, health, livelihood, and social justice and so
on.
 Activating the DM Plans with the participation of the community
 Formation of Task forces and their capacity building
During Disaster
 Arranging emergency communication through available resources
 Evacuation to temporary shelter and running relief camps
 Supplementing rescue and relief efforts in coordinating different
agencies
 Monitoring of Relief distribution
 Safe disposal of carcass and arranging safe drinking water and
sanitation
Post Disaster
 Damage assessment particularly assisting in identifying victims for
compensation and its distribution
 Formulating rehabilitation and reconstruction plan of houses and other
local infrastructures
 Enforce minimum specification for safe reconstruction
 Supervise and monitor long term reconstruction and mitigation
projects

 Mobilising special funds to use disaster resistant construction
technology in vulnerable areas
Role of PRIs during different phases of disaster Table: 6.9
Phase–I: Pre- Disaster
Gram Panchayats Block/ Panchayat Samitis District/ Zilla Parishads
1 Convening meetings of
ward members to
ensure proper
information regarding
the warning signal
searched the people
through all media
modes.
Supervise preparedness of the
Gram Panchayats.
Before the onset of monsoon
(May) and likely periods of
cyclone (May-June & Oct-Nov),
the District Collector should have
a meeting of all District Heads of
the sectoral, Departments and the
Members of the ZP for
preparedness.
2 Updating information
on Civic amenities,
Population Government
and Panchayat
properties, Housing and
cattle /livestock
population
Consolidate village wise
information on items listed
under GP
All the concerned departments,
specially Roads &Buildings, Major
and Minor Irrigation, PDS,
Communication Police, Revenue
Electricity, etc., to take up
necessary repair and maintenance
and related works for
preparedness to counter Flood &
Cyclone Disasters.
3 Selection of location for
shifting people/
livestock to safer places
 Arrangements for transport to
assist Gram Panchayats for
evacuation
 Keep Cyclone shelters/ safer
buildings like schools in ready
condition for temporary shelter
for the people
 Arrangements for establishing
relief and rehabilitation centers
and materials required thereof.
 Arrangements for supply and
storage of food and other items
of basic necessities
To organize ‘Task Force’ at District,
Block and the Village levels.
4 Special arrangements for
evacuation of
handicapped, children
and expectant mothers
Engineering staff at the Block
levels should repair drainage
/canal/ roads etc.
To identify and enlist NGOs who
are useful in extending help
during disasters

5 Medical sanitation
requirements relief
camps
Contacting Ex-army /Security
forces personal /volunteers to
organize a task force to assist
people in emergency
Check the inventories of items
required at a short notice for
rescue and relief operations
during the impact of disasters.
6 Arrangements
disconnecting lines
during winds/gales
Procure and keep rescue
materials including boats ready
At the first warning alert all
concerned at Block and Village
levels.
7 Stocking food grains,
drinking water and
other necessities
Function as link between the
district and village level
counter disaster activities
All the members of the DDMC
should be asked to keep their
personnel preparedness, at all
levels down the line
8 Arrangements
disconnecting lines
during winds/gales
Procure and keep rescue
materials including boats ready
Ensure the control room
functioning round the clock
during the crisis.
Phase-II: During Disaster
1 At the on-set
warning of a disaster,
the Gram Panchayat
Leaders, with the help of
District and Block
Level officers start
preparations for
countering Disaster.
Establishment of
temporary shelters
relief camps should
start immediately.
With the final warning of
cyclone, flood disasters, identify
the villages likely to be affected
and send teams of Task Forces
/Volunteers to the villages to
supervise counter disaster
measures.
In the event of on-set of a
cyclone or monitor the
situation, identify the Blocks
and villages most likely to be
affected and issue warnings at
close intervals to all concerned.
2 With the final warning,
operations for the
evacuation of people
and the livestock to
safer places before the
disaster strikes.
Arrange transport facilities to
evacuate people from villages
likely to be affected and help GPs
to shelter them in temporary
relief camps
Activate control room and keep
full watch on the situations
3 Along with evacuation
of people and livestock,
storage of food and
water for the people
and the livestock to be
made.
Arrange for emergency
communication facility through
wireless etc.
Arrange emergency
communication system

4 The Volunteers and the
task forces to be kept in
full readiness to take
rescue operation at the
shortest notice.
Arrange and assist GPs to
establish temporary shelters/relief
camps.
Put the DDMC on job for
assisting Block and GPs for
taking counter disaster measures.
5 Medical and other relief
teams from the district
and Block to be asked to
take position at
strategic points and
coordinate with the
volunteers.
Arrange for the supply and
transport of necessary food and
other items to relief camps
inadequate quantities.
Arrange transport for the
evacuation of the people and
livestock
Phase III: Post Disaster
1 Assist in the
identification of the
victims of the disaster
and eligible for various
types of compensations
and assist in the
distribution
Assist in Planning and
Implementation of
Rehabilitation of affected
people; Repair and
reconstruction of damaged
house, physical infrastructure etc
and return to normal economic
activities including farming etc
Planning and Implementation of
Rehabilitation of affected people,
repair and reconstruction of
damaged houses, physical
infrastructure, etc and return to
normal economic activities
including farming etc
2 Formulate
reconstruction plan for
individual houses,
community and
Department buildings,
roads and other physical
infrastructure within the
jurisdiction of the GP
with the assistance of the
technical departments
from block and district
levels.
Assist GPs in identification of
persons eligible for different
types of compensation and its
distribution.
Compensation for loss of lives,
properties of individuals to begin
3 Enforce minimum code
or specifications for the
construction of
individual houses,
community and
Government buildings,
roads and other
physical infrastructure.
Based on hazard and
vulnerability prepare village
and block level mitigation plan
and consolidate and integrate
into block plan
Mapping of hazard and
vulnerability to be initiated, if it
is not available detailed maps to
be prepared for each block and
district.

6.4 Incident Response System (IRS)
The Incident Response System or IRS broadly refers to a management system to
be used for incidents of various kinds and sizes such as earthquakes, floods, cyclones,
landslides etc. or emergencies caused by train accidents, epidemics. The system provides
scope to organize various functions, tasks and staffs within the overall response process
while emphasizing greater coordination and communication among different
organizations involved. IRS as a system is flexible and adaptable to suit any scale of
natural as well as man-made emergency/incidents. It can be useful for routine
emergencies such as road and train accidents and for large, complex multi-jurisdictional
disasters such as the recent tsunami. In fact, IRS as a management system draws its
strengths from its applicability to different kind of incidents/disasters of varying scales.
Through Incident Response System (IRS), the main intention is to transform the
confusion during the early stage of an emergency situation into a well managed response
process by providing answers to vital questions such as “who’s in charge? “ & “what’s
my job?”
The relevance of IRS can be easily understood if we analyze response to some of
the disasters/incident such as Orissa super cyclone 1999, Gujarat earthquake 2001 or
recurring hazards such as flood and drought experienced every year. The response to
these emergencies requires involvement of number of organizations/ departments such as
Health, Revenue, Public Works, Communications, Home, Finance, Rural Development,
Roads, Agriculture, Animal Husbandry etc.
Achieving coordination among these agencies during emergency time create
unique challenges such as line of authority, supervision, resource management,
differences in terminology and other communication problem, span of control etc. Often
it is found that as a result of these difficulties, the response process suffers leading to
poor incident management. How better can we coordinate among these responding
agencies which have different organizational structures, line of authority, communication
patterns? How can we ensure that personnel involved in such responses do not get
overwhelmed by the incident and have the ability and competence to function well during
such crucial hours?
To address such issues, Incident Response System (IRS) provides a framework,
which makes use of management concepts such as unified command indicating clear line
of authority, organizational flexibility for different scale of emergencies, standard

terminology for better communication, resource management procedures for efficient use
and systematic guidelines for an effective incident response. National Institute of Disaster
Management which had played a key role in HPC work was involved in consultations.
This was one of the important components of GOI-USAID Disaster Management
Support Program. Accordingly, Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of
Administration (LBSNAA), Mussoorie was initially designated as the nodal training
Centre for this purpose. NIDM is the Nodal institution for all training and development
on such matters. It is important to note here that the IRS does not seek to supplement the
existing administrative structure, which is an outcome of organic evolution over a long
period of time. It rather tries to strengthen this structure through integrating various IRS
principles and through training of key personnel for specialized functions during time of
emergencies.
Management of such incidents will also involve other line departments for
example, Power, Communication, Health, Public Works, Police etc. Achieving
coordination and communication among these departments is often found to be very
difficult. IRS in such context operates through the basic principle of providing prior
training to the administrators within a specific framework with an objective of making
response process much more effective.
Further, if an earthquake is of more severe nature causing heavy damages, the
normal existing practice is to depute Senior Officials from the state head quarter or other
departments for managing the situation. IRS in these conditions tries to ensure adequate
training of such personnel for emergencies at different levels i.e. District, State and
National level. The use of common framework, which means use of common
terminologies, standardized methods etc. ensures that not only a smooth transfer of
authority takes place but also continuity in the on-going efforts is maintained. The
responding personnel who may be drawn from different departments and backgrounds
when operate in an IRS environment have a common objective of stabilizing the incident
and restoring normalcy.
*******

Chapter-VII
Capacity Building
Capacity is defined as the ability of individuals, organizations, organizational units and
systems to perform functions effectively and in a sustainable manner. It is also defined as
“the process through which individuals and societies obtain, strengthen and maintain the
capabilities to set and achieve their own development objectives over time”. Simply put, if
capacity is the means to plan and achieve then capacity development describes the way to
those means (UNDP). Capacity development covers strengthening institutions, mechanism,
and capacities at all levels of all stakeholders. The United International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction (UNISDR) defines Capacity Development for DRR as the process by which
people, organization and society systematically stimulate and develop their capability over
time to achieve social and economic goals, including through systems, and institutionswithin a wider social cultural enabling environment. Capacity Building is an important
component of investing in Disaster Risk Reduction. In the domain of disaster risk
management, the Sendai Frame work emphasizes the need for enhancing the technical,
financial and administrative capabilities of institutions, governments, and communities to
deal with the identified risks at different levels, The Framework calls for reinforcing the
capacity to implement and enforce risk reduction measures. Capacity development
commonly refers to a process that is driven from inside and starts from existing capacity
assets. The Sendai Framework underlines the need for capacity development of women in
disaster management and building their ability to participate effectively in managing disaster
risks. Building capacity for reducing risks is also necessary for achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs).
7.1 DM Act Provision for Capacity Building
Section 2 (b) of DM Act, 2005 delineates the Capacity Building measures to be under taken.
As per the Sub-Section (i) of Section 2 (b) Capacity Building includes identification of
existing resources and resources to be acquired or created. As per Sub Section (ii) of Section 2
(b) acquiring or creating resources identified under Sub-Clause (i). Sub Section (iii)
emphasizes on organization and training of personal and coordination of such training

effective management of disaster. Sub Section 2 (i) of Section 3 of DM act, postulate that
National Disaster Management Authority take Capacity Building measures for dealing with
threatening disaster situation or disaster. Under the sub section 2 (j) of Section 10,the National
Executive Committee plan and coordinate specialised training programme on disaster
management for different level of officers, employees and voluntary rescue workers. As per
the Section 11 (1), Sub-Section 3 (c), The National Disaster Management Plan shall include
measures to be taken for preparedness and capacity building to effectively respond to any
threatening disaster. (Source: DM Act-2005)
Table 7.1 Training Institutions in Odisha
Name of Institution Areas of Intervention Activities –Level
Gopabandhu
Academy of
Administration
Bhubaneswar
DM and DRR approaches,
integration and
mainstreaming, adaptation;
planning needs
and strategies, coordination,
strategic and analytical
tools, regional local
cooperation,
human resource planning,
ground action evaluation
and monitoring, disaster
reporting,
institutions, incident
management, etc.
Training of IAS officers (all
levels) and other civil
service officers, and faculty
members
State Institute of
Rural
Development
(SIRD) – Disaster
Management Cell
Bhubaneswar
DM and DRR approaches,
integration and
mainstreaming, adaptation;
mitigation strategies, risk
analysis and impact
assessment, mutli-hazard
risk analysis and
management, climatechange and natural resources
related
disasters, food security and
livelihood issues in disaster
management, rural
institutions, and community
participation in DRR
Training of officials from
government departments
in rural development, water,
environment, land-use,
agriculture, etc. and faculty
from institutes of
government and outside,
NGOs, PRIs, etc.
Institution on
Management of
DM and DRR approaches
for agriculture, food and
Training of officials of deptt.
agriculture/ forestry, land

Agricultural
Extension (IMAGE)
Agriculture Dept.
Bhubaneswar
natural resources,
integration and
mainstreaming, climate
change adaptation;
mitigation strategies, mutlihazard risk analysis and
impact assessment,
agrochemicals, GMOs,
biotech and microbial
disasters, coastal and
forest hazards; plant
protection, land-use, rural
livelihood, DRR, etc.
use,
environment, KVKs,
WALMI, faculty of related
institutes/ colleges, NGOs,
etc.
Regional Institution
on Training and Extension
(RITE) -Agriculture Dept.
(Mahisapat, Dhenkanal,
Bolangir,
Rangeilunda, Ganjam)
DM and DRR approaches
for agriculture, food, and
natural resources,
integration and
mainstreaming, climate
change adaptation;
mitigation strategies, mutlihazard risk analysis and
impact assessment,
agrochemicals, GMOs,
biotech and microbial
disasters, coastal and forest
hazards; plant protection,
land-use, rural livelihood,
DRR, etc.
Training of department
officials from agriculture/
forestry, land use,
environment, KVKs,
WALMI, faculty of related
institutes/ colleges, NGOs,
etc.
Centre for Environmental
Studies, Forest Department,
GoO
DM and DRR approaches,
integration and
mainstreaming, adaptation;
educational,
training and research needs
and strategies, risk analysis
and impact assessment,
forestry sector and disaster
management, forest fire
management, etc.
Training of IFS officials,
state
forest service officials,
faculty members/ scientists
in forestry/ environment,
S & T, agriculture institutes,
etc.
Fire Training
Institute
Safety and risk reduction in
technical education/
institutes, lab safety,
electrical and chemical
safety, earthquake safety,
pandemic control,
disaster risk reduction,
awareness, etc.
Diploma course on Safety
Risk Management,
Occupational Health and
Safety, Response
Preparedness, Short-courses
for government officials, etc
National Institute DM and DRR approaches; Training of faculty

of Technology,
Rourkela
integration and
mainstreaming; adaptation;
educational;
training and research needs;
mitigation strategies; risk
analysis and impact
assessment;
mutli-hazard risk analysis
and management; EIA;
auditing; chemical disasters;
climate
change; coastal and forest
related disasters; disasters
related with water,
sanitation, and health; waste
management; climatechange; law and policy,
vulnerability, planning and
management, etc.
members of universities/
management /technical
institutes, senior officials/
executives from
government, corporate or
NGOs, professional and
management development
courses, etc.
Utkal University Departments
of Climate Concerned StudiesSponsored Orientation
programmes in University
Departments
DM and DRR Approaches,
Integration and
mainstreaming, Adaptation;
Educational,
training and research needs
and strategies, Risk analysis
and impact assessment,
Regional and
local cooperation, Planning
and preparedness, Role of
NSS, NCC, Infusing DM
and DRR into
higher education, etc.
University department heads/
deans, college/teachers,
technical staff, etc.zonal/
state level courses
under UGC
refresher/orientation course
under environment studies
and sponsored by other
ministries
NDMA/MoEF/DST, etc.
Odisha University
of Agriculture and
Technology
(OUAT),
Bhubaneswar
DM and DRR approaches,
integration and
mainstreaming, adaptation;
educational,
training, and research needs
as well as strategies, risk
analysis and impact
assessment, regional and
local cooperation, planning
and preparedness ,role of
NSS, NCC, Infusing DM
and DRR into
higher education, etc.
Training of department
officials in agriculture/
forestry, land use,
environment, KVKs,
WALMI, faculty of related
institutes/ colleges, NGOs,
etc.
Source: Training Need Assessment on DRR and Climate Change Adaptation, December-2014,
prepared by All India Disaster Mitigation Institute with support of OSDMA)

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

7.3 Departmental Capacity Building Plan
7.3.1 W &CD and Mission Shakti Department
State level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
Additional Secretary, Joint
Secretary, Deputy Secretary,
Under Secretaries,
SOs/ASOs
Training cum awareness programme at state level for better
supervision, monitoring and taking preventive measures.
District Level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
DSWOs, CDPOs,
Supervisors,
Superintendents of
CCIs & other
Institutions/Homes
Training programmes on effective management of disasters
Community level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
AWWs, ASHAs, SHG
members, GKS members,
members of Jaanch
Committee/Mother’s
Committee, village
volunteers
Public awareness programmes. Distribution of relevant posters,
leaflets, pamphlets in simple Odia language.
7.3.2 Commerce & Transport Department
For the Staff:
Training
Programmes on
Key Components/Topics Target Audience
First-Aid 1. Providing First-Aid to the road
accident victims.
2. How to shift the victim to the nearest
hospital. food grains during floods,
drought, cyclones, tsunami
All RTOs, Inspectors / Jr.
Inspectors of Motor Vehicles,
all Traffic Inspectors / SubInspectors, Constables of
Transport Department.

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

For Other Stakeholders
Sl
No.
Training Programme
on
Key Components Target Audience
1 Driving Training in
Heavy Vehicle
Category
Theory and Practical training on
driving skill
Interested youths
2. Driving Training in
Light Vehicle
Category
Theory and Practical training on
driving skill
Interested youths
3. Road Safety
Awareness
About traffic rules and safety norms to
be followed while on road
General Public.
State level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
Additional
Commissioners of
Transport, Joint
Commissioner
Transport, Asst.
Directors
Training cum awareness programme at state level for better
supervision, monitoring and taking preventive measures.
District Level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
RTOs., MVIs, Jr.
MVIs, TIs, TSIs,
Constables
Training programmes on effective management of disasters like
cyclone/floods, road accidents, Bus / Truck Operator’s strike.
Community level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
Awareness programmes
on road safety for
general public
Public awareness programmes. Distribution of relevant posters,
leaflets, pamphlets in simple Odia language.
7.3.3 Electronics & Information Technology Department
Electronics & Information Technology
Training
Programmes on
Key Components/Topics Target Audience
Awareness and
Sensitization
towards Cyber
Security
Awareness and sensitization of all
Government officials of Odisha towards
impacts of Cyber Security and
importance of its knowledge.
Officials of E&IT department,
OCAC, SeMT, SDC Composite
Team, Other department
officials of Odisha, DeGMs and
other district level officials

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

State level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
Additional Secretary,
Joint Secretary, Deputy
Secretary, Under
Secretaries, SOs/ASOs
Training cum awareness programme at state level for better
supervision, monitoring and taking preventive measures during Cyber
Crisis.
District Level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
DeGMs, DEOs, & other
district level officers
Training programmes on effective management of Cyber Security,
Disaster Management, Physical Security measures for IT
Infrastructures etc.
Community level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
DeGMs,IT Associations
members,
Manufacturers &
Dealers of electronic
products
Public awareness programmes. Distribution of relevant posters,
leaflets, pamphlets in dual languages.
7.3.4 Excise Department
Training
Programmes on Key Components/Topics Target Audience
Prevention
mitigation &
preparedness plan
for prevention of
Disasters if
occurred due to
consumption of
spurious liquor
To conduct massive raids on suspected
places, cases to be booked & accused
persons are to arrest persons involved in
illegal liquor trade.
-
The duty and execution of work of
Multidisciplinary Squad constituted in
the district of excise raids consisting of
officials of Excise, Forest, Revenue,
Health & Police under the supervision of
Excise Superintendent.
Excise Officials starting from
Constables to Deputy
Superintendents of Excise To check spread to ID & spurious liquor
Nature of public awareness against the
illegal liquor trade/ ID liquor
consumption
Mechanism for early warning and
dissemination thereof, trigger
mechanism for response. Rescue
operation of the affected people at the
Excise officials starting from
Constables to Inspectors of
Excise

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

district level.
Arms and ammunition training to Excise
Officials
S.I. of Excise & Inspectors of
Excise.
Anticipation of fire
accident due to
storage of alcohols.
Fire safety measures to be taken in
Depots & Distilleries BM of OSBC Depot/ OIC
To recoup loss if
any due to
occurrence of
nature calamity like
fire accident, storm,
earthquake etc.
Coverage of insurance of OSBC
Godowns BM of OSBC Depots
Precaution for
leakage of molasses
in the factory, it is
apprehension of
tank, bust resulting
to damage to
factory boundary
wall, spread of
store molasses in
the surrounding
area including in
the public road
creates death of
persons
Submission of environment pollution
control certificate from the concerned
Board before issuing licenses to the
distilleries.
Excise Officials including
distilleries
All the factory units, OSBC Depots to
follow industrial guidelines.
The OICs engaged by Excise
Deptt., the Factory Officials &
Depot managers
State level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
Additional Secretary,
Deputy Secretary,
Under Secretaries,
SOs/ASOs
Training cum awareness programme at state level for better
supervision, monitoring and taking preventive measures.
District Level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
Superintendent of
Excise , Dy
Superintendent of
Excise, Inspector/ S.I./
A.S.I/ Constables
Training programmes on effective management of disasters like Liquor
Disaster.

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

Community level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
Local Communities and
NGOs
Public awareness programmes. Distribution of relevant posters,
leaflets, pamphlets in simple Odia language.
7.3.5 Fisheries & ARD Department
7.3.5.1 Capacity Building Framework for ARD Sector:
Sl. No. Title Programme Programme Objectives
1 Disaster Preparedness for
Livestock management
To Analyse implications of disasters on livestock
sector
Describe the different phases of disaster management
State Odisha Relief Code provisions, notifications
pertaining to ARD sector
Acquaint with Standard Operating Procedures laid
down in Disaster management Plan for ARD
2 Climate Change effects on
Livestock
To State various factors of Livestock sector
contributing to global warming
To describe the effect of Methane to increase Green
house gas
To describe the ways to reduce green house gas
emission from Livestock
3 Orientation programme on
Disaster response & mitigation
at Regional level for District
IRTs
To describe the role & functions of IRT at District
and Block level
4 Training workshop for
NGOs/CBOs/Animal welfare
organizations at district level
To orient about the rescue, rehabilitation,
preparedness, Carcass disposal
5 Training on Community
Preparedness regarding
livestock management in the
event of Disaster
To sensitise the Community Volunteers regarding
preparedness in relation to livestock sector to
mitigate Disaster
6 Master Trainer Training on
Disaster management relating to
ARD Sector
To create a pool of Master trainers on ARD Sector
7.3.5.2 Capacity Building Plan for Fisheries Sector
Sl.No Particulars Measures required
1 Capacity building
at all level in
vulnerable areas
flood / cyclone
State level –For better supervision, monitoring and preventive
measures one day training-cum-awareness programme may be
organized at state level. All Dy. Directors, District Fisheries
Officers, Addl. Fisheries Officers will attend. This may be
organized at Directorate, Cuttack with the help of OSDMA and

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

other related organizations.
District level – District Fisheries Officer/ Addl. Fisheries
Officer/Asst. Fisheries Officer/ Sr. Technical Assistant & Jr.
Fisheries Technical Assistant may be trained to effectively
manage flood, cyclone etc. OSDMA and District Disaster Cell
will organize the workshop.
Community level – 29th October of each year is observed as
the disaster mitigation day in fisheries sector. In this particular
day public awareness program will be organized in each
village to sensitize the community. Village volunteers / fish
farmers & fishermen will be trained regarding rescue and
protection of their tanks / ponds and shifting of boats & nets to
a safer place and carcass disposal etc.
2 Public awareness
through IEC
activities
Mass awareness programme may be done through different
audio-visual media to sensitize fishermen and fish farmers
3 Installation of bore
well
During drought most of the tanks and ponds are dried out.
There will be heavy mortality of fish due to inadequate water
in the ponds so bore will facilities should be given to the
farmers with 50% subsidy by RWSS Department to maintain
the optimum water level. Further, permission may be given to
the fish farmers to intake water from the irrigation channel.
State level Capacity-Building Plans
For better supervision, monitoring and preventive measures one day training cum awareness
programme is to be organized at state level. In this programme Director / Addl. Director will
chair and Jt. Directors, Dy. Directors, District Fisheries Offices along with personnel
involved in the training activity will participates. Event will be managed by Directorate.
District Level Capacity-Building Plans
Similarly, a capacity building programmes are to be organized in the district level to sensitize
the field staff working at the grass root level. In this programme the person trained in the state
level programme will facilitate at district level. Here the participants are Addl. Fisheries
Officer, Asst. Fisheries Officers, SFTA, JFTA. Depending upon the number of participants
the training will be decided. The number of participants should not exceed more than 50. This
event will be managed by the District Fisheries Officer of the respective district.

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

Community Level Capacity-Building Plans
PRI members need to participate. Trained technical people from district / block will coordinate the programme with the help of village contact person. Event may be managed by
AFO/NGO of the block. In this public awareness campaign the relevant poster, leaflets,
pamphlets in Odiya language will be distributed to all participants. The resource person from
OSDMA may be called for this training.
7.3.6 Food Supplies and Consumer Welfare Department
Sl. No Particulars Measures required
1 Capacity building at
all level in vulnerable
areas flood/cyclone
State level –
For better supervision, monitoring and preventive measures
one day training cum awareness programme will be
organized at state level. Managers of OSCSC /
CSOs/ACSOs/ will attend. This may be organised at
Conference Hall of the Consumer Forum, Bhubaneswar.
District levelISs/PIs/ AMs will be trained to effectively manage flood,
cyclone etc. OSDMA and District Disaster Cell will organize
the workshop in Collector’s Conference Hall.
Community LevelDuring October of each year, a public awareness program
will be organized in each village to sensitize the community.
Village volunteers will be trained regarding rescue and
shifting of food grains to safer places.
2 Public awareness
through IEC activities
Mass awareness programme shall be done through different
audio-visual media to sensitize people.
State level Capacity Building Programme
For better supervision, monitoring and preventive measures, a daylong training cum
awareness programme will be organized at state level. In this programme MD-OSCSC will
Chair and senior officials of the FS & CW Dept. and OSCSC along with personnel involved
in the training activity in the training institute will participate. Event will be managed by
OSCSC ltd. with the support from Legal Metrology.
District level Capacity Building Programme
A similar capacity building program will be organized in the district level to sensitize the
field staff working at the cutting edge. In this programme personnel who had attended state

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

level programme will facilitate at district level. Here the participants will be CSO/ACSO/IS
/PI. Depending upon the numbers of the participants the training batch will be decided. A
batch size for a programme should not exceed 50 participants. Event will be managed by
CSO of the respective District.
The fund required (18 lakh) for prevention of disaster, mitigation, capacity building
and preparedness has been proposed by the Dept. for financial approval by Special Relief
Commissioner (SRC).
7.3.7 Housing and Urban Development Department
State level Capacity-Building Plan
Training for Programmes
Training for
Community Organizers
and Executive Officers
of ULBs
Awareness generation among community members on various aspects
of disaster.
Training programmes on preparedness measures.
Training programmes on Relief and Restoration.
Training programmes on documentation and reporting,
Community level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
Slum dwellers/ULBs Awareness programme on various aspects of disaster management
more importantly on urban flooding.
Capacity-Building of Stakeholders and Beneficiaries of the department
Training of the stakeholders is one of the key requirements of any disaster management
planning. The H&UD department will ensure regular training of the officials from urban local
bodies. As per the Disaster Management Act, the State Disaster Management Authority
(SDMA) and the state disaster management plan are mandated to provide direction and
coordination to ensure the implementation of all disaster management policies and plans.
Training needs have to be identified for each department, appropriate training programs
need to be designed and conducted at all levels involving broad spectrum of stakeholders
(from government, NGOs and civil society) to fully realize the needs of sensitization,
knowledge/information management and skill development of personnel involved in the
disaster management functions.

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

7.3.8 MS & ME Department
Sl.
No.
Training Programmes on Key Components/Topics Target Audience
1. How to be prepared for
Natural disasters like Floods,
Cyclones, and Earthquakes
and reduce losses.
 How to construct robust
building / sheds which are
prone to earthquakes
 The importance of insurance.
 Fund management i.e;
provisions for Disaster
management.
Entrepreneurs / Promoters
of MSMEs
2. Damage Assessment Various methods of estimation in
terms of quantity & value.
All Officers of Directorate
of Industries, All GM,
RICs/ DICs, All IPOs &
Industrial Supervisors.
3. Supervision & Monitoring
and Taking preventive
measures
Training cum awareness
programme at State level for
better supervision, monitoring and
taking preventive measures.
Addl. Secy., Jt. Secy.,
Director of Industries,
Addl. DI, JDI, Spl. Officer,
ADI, SO.
State level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
Additional Secretary,
Joint Secretary, Deputy
Secretary, Under
Secretaries, Additional
Directors / Joint
Directors / Special
Officers / Deputy
Directors / Asst.
Directors of Industries /
SOs
Training cum awareness programme at State level for better supervision,
monitoring and taking preventive measures.
District Level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
GM, RICs / DICs, Training programmes on effective management of disasters like
cyclone/floods.

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

Block level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
IPOs , IS Methods of assessment of damage and reporting.
7.3.9 ST & SC Department
Sl
No.
Training Programmes
on
Key Components/Topics Target Audience
1 Safety of Students &
Boarders residing in
Schools & Hostels of ST
& SC DevDeptt
Educational Institutions
Securing boarders residing in Hostels
during incidences of flash floods& safe
evacuation during disaster emergencies
Headmasters/
Wardens of Schools
& Hostels of St &
SC DevDeptt,
District Welfare
Officers (DWOs)
Welfare Extension
Officers,(WEOs)
2 Safety of Civil
Structures &
construction activities
like Water Harvesting
Structures (WHS),
Check-Dams, Diversion
Weirs, Gravity flow
Irrigation projects
undertaken in the TSP
areas
Awareness regarding vulnerability of
these structures to natural disasters like
flash floods, cyclones,
Project
Administrators, Asst
Executive
Engineers, Local
communities,
NGOs,
3. Safety measures of
Livelihood projects
running under the Focus
Area Development
Programme (FADP)
like WADI, Fisheries
programme, Vegetable
Cultivation, Poultry,
Coffee, Goat rearing,
Rubber & Lac
Cultivation, Cold
Houses for storage of
farmers’ produce
Awareness regarding comparative
vulnerability of certain activities like
fisheries, poultry, vegetable cultivation
and preventive steps to be taken
minimizing the risk during Disasters like
floods, saline water ingress during
floods, cyclone etc. Since death cases
due to lightning strikes has intensified
over the years, it is required to be
included alongside other natural
disasters.
Field staff of Odisha
Tribal Development
Society (OTDS) like
Project
Administrators
(PAs) ITDA; Project
Managers (PMs),
Subject Matter
Specialists (SMSes),
FNGOs
4. Action Plan for safety of
the Particularly
Vulnerable Tribal
Groups (PVTGs)
(Primitive Tribal
Population) in their
habitat areas coming
under 17 Micro Projects
Awareness regarding the overall
topography, remoteness & lack of proper
accessibility to those areas & the
requirement of the preparedness of a
special nature for these areas.
Special Officers of
Micro Projects,
NGOs, local
communities

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

situated in extremely
remote regions of 12
districts
State level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
Additional Secretary,
Joint Secretary, Deputy
Director-cum-Deputy
Secretaries, Deputy
Secretary,Under
Secretaries, D.O., S.O.
ASOs
Training cum awareness programme at State level for better
supervision, monitoring and taking preventive measures.
District Level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
PA, ITDA, DWOs,
ADWOs, WEOs, Spl.
Officers of Micro
Projects, Project
Managers &Subject
Matter Specialists of
OTDS, Staff of District
Units of TDCCOL,
OSFDC, OTELP,
ITDAs
Training programmes on effective management of disasters like
cyclone/floods
Community level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
Facilitating NGOs of
OTDA, Micro Projects,
Village Committees, ,
Village Volunteers
Public awareness programmes. Distribution of relevant posters, leaflets,
pamphlets in simple Odia language.
7.3.10 Steel and Mines Department
State level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programme
Additional Secretary, Joint Secretary, Deputy
Secretary, Under Secretaries, SOs/ASOs
Training cum awareness programme at state
level for better supervision, monitoring and
taking preventive measures.

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

Zonal/Circle Level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
JDGs, DDGs & DDMs, Geologists & Mining
Officers, Supervisors, Surveyors, Asst. Mining
Officers, Technical Assistants, Field Officers
Training programmes on effective management
of operational disasters in the mines and natural
disasters
Community level Capacity-Building Plans
Training for Programmes
Personnel of respective mines Training programmes on effective management
of operational disasters in the mines and natural
disasters.
Training Programmes on Key Components/Topics Target Audience
Mines Disaster Exploring ways to introduce
sustainable practices to
combat:
Fire
Inundation
Subsidence
Slope failure
Explosion
Diseases related to Mining
Officials of Steel and Mines
Department, Mines, Mining
Communities, NGOs
Natural Disaster Sensitization towards
practices which are more
resilient to natural disasters,
provide prompt relief and
rescue after a disaster event.
Management of men and
materials to provide relief
from impact natural disasters
and rescue and recovery
operations.
Officials of Steel and Mines
Department, Mines, Mining
Communities, NGOs
7.4 Cyclone Shelter Maintenance and Management Committee (CSMMC)
and Flood Shelter Maintenance and Management Committee (FSMMC)
level Training Programmes
50 Taskforce volunteers both male and female in the age group of 18 to 35 from each shelter
are being trained for 11 days on Search & Rescue, First Aid and operation & maintenance of
the equipment’s by master trainers from Civil Defense, St. John Ambulance, ODRAF
personnel & District level Trainers. The training on effective Shelter Management to
CSMMC/FSMMC members, training on Record keeping & standard Shelter Equipment
operational skills are also provided. The detail is as follows:

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

Table: 7.5
Sl
No.
Training Programmes on No. of days Participants
1 Effective Shelter
Management and
Maintenance
1 day CSMMC/FSMMC
members, community
members
2 Search & Rescue 4 days Task Force Member (25
members, between 18-35
years of age, Male/Female )
3 First-Aid 2 days Task Force Member (25
members, between 18-35
years of age, Male/Female )
4 Record keeping at shelter
level
2 days CSMMC/FSMMC members
5 Handling of equipments
provided to shelters.
2days Task force members (25
members)
7.5 NCRMP, Component-C (Technical Assistance for Cyclone Hazard Risk
Mitigation, Capacity Building and Knowledge Creation)
The activities under National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project, Component C are to assist
thirteen vulnerable coastal states and UTs to improve their understanding of natural disaster
risks and vulnerabilities, and strengthen their institutional capacity to address such risks and
vulnerabilities. The component supports pilot activities to be implemented by NDMA. The
total budgetary outlay of this component is Rs. 22.4 Crs.
7.6 “Apada Mitra: Training of Community Volunteers in Disaster
Response in India”
Apada Mitra is a NDMA scheme aims to train community volunteers in disaster response in
the selected most flood prone district of India. In case of any disaster or emergency, before
any government machinery & support reaches or outside help gets galvanized, it is the
Community which has to respond immediately. As the Community plays the role of First
Responder, it is critical that there is adequate awareness and preparedness at the Community
level especially amongst people residing in the most vulnerable areas of the country.
Floods have been a recurrent phenomenon in India and cause huge losses to lives,
properties, livelihood systems, infrastructure and public utilities. India’s high risk and
vulnerability is highlighted by the fact that 40 million hectares out of a geographical area of
329 million hectares is prone to floods. On an average every year, 75 lakh hectares of land is
affected,1600 lives are lost and the damage caused to crops, houses and public utilities is Rs.
1805 Crores due to floods (National DM Guidelines on Management of Floods 2008). The

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

frequency of major floods is more than once in five years. The devastation caused by floods
in recent years like the Mumbai Deluge -2005, Kosi Mega Flood-2008 in Bihar, Uttarakhand
Flash floods 2013, Jammu Kashmir Floods -2014 and Chennai Floods -2015 highlight the
critical need of strengthening local community capacity for response to minimize loss of
precious lives.
When a disaster happens, volunteers from the affected community are normally the
first to act. The impact of volunteers in disaster response can be tremendous, as the extent of
damage – in terms of economic and human loss – is greatly influenced by the initial response
to a disaster. Therefore, there lies a critical need to train these volunteers in certain basic
skills in disaster management so that they are able to respond in an informed and prompt
manner as well as assist the concerned agencies in rescue and relief operations. Over the
years, the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF), State Disaster Response Forces
(SDRF) and other State responders have successfully contributed towards saving of lives and
securing of assets in disaster situations in India. In a similar manner, it would be important to
train the volunteers drawn from Civil Defence, Home Guards, Youths and members of the
communities etc. so that they are able to assist the community in effective disaster response.
The said NDMA scheme is to provide the community volunteers with the basic skills that
they will need to respond to their community’s immediate needs in the aftermath of a disaster
(with a focus on flood). These trained volunteers can assist in saving lives using the basic
techniques of disaster response, coordination and management.
Objectives of the Scheme:
 To train able-bodied community volunteers in disaster response (flood relief and
rescue) at the taluka/block level in each of the project districts. These trained volunteers
will be called as AapdaMitra.
 To develop standardized training modules for the set of trainings under the scheme.
 To train the volunteers in life saving skills of disaster response, coordination and
assistance, and provide personal protective equipment and emergency responder kit.
 To create a Community Emergency Stockpile/Reserve at the district/block level
containing essential light search and rescue equipments, medical first aid kits, etc.
 To disseminate training and education tools developed under the project to more
number of flood prone districts in subsequent phases of the scheme.
In the State of Odisha two most flood prone districts viz. “Puri” and “Jagatsinghpur”
have been identified for implementation of the Scheme. 400 Community Level Volunteers

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

have already been trained in both the project districts of Puri and Jagatsinghpur. The Apada
Mitra Volunteers have done remarkable work during the Extremely Severe Cyclonic Storm
FANI in the month of May-2019. They assisted the District Administration of Puri and
Jagatsinghpur districts in evacuating the vulnerable people to the safe shelters, disseminated
the early warning messages and distributed relief to the affected people. They also provided
first-aid to the injured persons at the shelters. They helped the response forces like ODRAF
and Odisha Fire Services in road clearance and search & rescue. The Apada Mitra volunteers
have also done wonderful work during the world famous Car Festival (Ratha Yartra) in the
districts of Puri and Jagatsinghpur.
7.7 Civil Defense
Civil Defense has been functioning in Odisha prior to the commencement of Civil Defense
Act-1968 i.e since pre-independence era under the ARP Act and subsequently under Defense
of india-1962.In accordance with the Civil Defense Act, rules, regulations and directives issued
by the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, Civil Defense has been
strengthened in Odisha. At present Government of India has declared Civil Defence to function
in the following Districts.
Angul (Talcher), Khorda (Bhubaneswar), Koraput, Sundergarh (Rourkela),
Jagatsinghpur (Paradip), Kendrapada), Bhdrak, Balasore, Dhenkanal, Ganjam, Puri. The first
five districts have been declared on the basis of their strategical vulnerability while the districts
like Kendrapada, Bhadrak, Balasoreand Dhenkanal have been declared as Multi Hazard prone
districts by GoI, MHA under the revamping scheme in the year 2011 and further added
districts like; Ganjam and Puri as Multi Vulnerable districts.
The Organization is functioning under the Home Department of the Government of
Odisha. The DG & IG/ Additional DG & IG of Police, Fire Services, Commandant General,
Home Guards has been declared as the Director of Civil Defense of the State to coordinate the
activities of the Controllers of Civil Defense i.e. the Districts Magistrate of the district
concerned. They are being assisted by the Deputy Controllers of Civil Defense placed in full
time basis or on ex-officio capacity.
The strength of the Organization vests in its trained, disciplined and dedicated young
volunteers being raised/identified from different walks of life and enrolled as volunteers under
CD Act Rules & Regulations. They are often called for training and exercises duty as and
when required.

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

Training is the hall mark of Civil Defense and has also been planned in 3 tier basis.
Training, if it is to be successful, must be progressive. Hence each step of training is well
consolidated before the next stage is attempted. The training proceeds from simple to complex
and more advanced stages. The various stages in which the training has been planned are
outlined below:
 Basic Training
 Service and Team Training
 Combined Training
These training are conducted at levels Local, District, State and National level
In addition to that, OSDMA has been taking up capacity building activities of
community members, task force members of cyclone shelters and flood shelters, civil defence
volunteers and others for disaster preparedness and response activities. Search and Rescue
(SAR) and First-Aid (FA) are the foundation of any capacity building initiative in disaster
management. Though a host of activities are being taken for capacity building in search and
rescue, there is no standardisation for this category of training in the state till now. The FirstAid training has been standardised by St. John Ambulance at the national level in to three
levels, i.e. Senior, Voucher, Medallion. Different formats and curricula have been defined by
St.John Ambulance for different levels of capacity building in First-Aid.
In line with it, it is proposed to standardise the community level capacity building
activities in Search & Rescue for better identification of the skill level of the youth at the
grass root level and effective utilisation of their skill in disaster response activities. The matter
was discussed with civil defence and other experts who have been long associated with
community level capacity building activities in the State. The following levels in community
level Search & Rescueare suggested for consideration:
SAVIOUR
ACHIEVER
RESCUER / RESCUE FIRST RESPONDER (RFR)
MASTER TRAINER
1. The stage one would be “Savior” where the community volunteers will be trained on
basic/ elementary courses of Search and Rescue & First Aid after which the trained
volunteers can protect themselves and support the rescuers.

State Disaster Management Plan-2017

2. The second stage would be “Achiever” where the trained volunteers will refresh their
training skills and in addition, would upgrade their skills and knowledge on advancement
of the elementary aspects of Search and Rescue/ First Aid. The Achievers will work in
rescue teams under the guidance of the team leaders.
3. The third stage would be “Rescue First Responder” (RFR)/ “Rescuer” under which the
CD volunteer would be trained on different facets of search and rescue along with the
leadership skills. After completing the training successfully, the community volunteer can
operate rescue operations independently and or lead /manage the team efficiently. After
this stage, the trained volunteers will be recognized as permanent rescuers and eligible to
participate in the higher level trainings in the state and outstate.
4. The fourth and final level would be “MASTER TRAINERS” and “EXAMINERS” for
the trainers who have completed the minimum level of “Rescuer/ First Responder”
training successfully.
7.8 SDRF Capacity Building Component
The State Disaster Respond Fund (SDRF) is a fund constituted under section 48 (1) (a) of the
Disaster Management Act, 2005 (53 of 2005). These guidelines are being issued under section
62 of the DM Act, 2005.
As per the provision of the SDRF (5%) of the annual allocation of the SDRF may be kept
for Capacity Building Activities by the State. These activities are as under
a) Setting up/strengthening of Emergency Operation Centers (EOCs) in the State.
b) Training/Capacity building of stakeholders and functionaries in the State.
c) Supporting disaster management centers of State and Administrative Training
Institutions.
d) Preparation of Disaster Management Plans based on Hazards, risk and Vulnerability
Analysis.
e) Strengthening of SDMAs and DDMAs.
********

Chapter – VIII
Knowledge Management
8.1 Partners of OSDMA in different activities of disaster
management.
Knowledge Management (KM) is a multidisciplinary approach to achieve the
desired objectives by creating, sharing, using and managing information as well
as technology of an organization. Thrust must be given towards exploring all
possible opportunities of knowledge requirement for augmenting potentials like
physical assets, human resources & services. Implementing a complete
knowledge management takes time and money. However, with a sound
knowledge network risks can be minimized by taking a phased approach that
gives beneficial returns at each step & tangible results quickly with enhanced
efficiency, better decision making and greater use of tested solutions across the
state. Strengths of Knowledge Networks in Disaster Management are like
 Better response.
 Empowered Government Disaster Management Departments.
 Better valuation of Resources and services
 Integration into mainstream development.
 Effective monitoring of initiatives.
 Promoting fair practices among the disaster management community.
Partnership is inevitable for effective knowledge management & Odisha being a
key player in disaster management at national as well as international domain has
a healthy network of partners in a varied field of disaster management as detailed
in the table no. 8.1 below

Partners of OSDMA (Table 8.1)
Sl
No. Theme Partners
1 Implementing Partners UNDP, UNICEF, World Bank, OCAC, IAG, CRS,
2 Knowledge Partners UNDP, UNICEF, NRDC, AIDMI
3 Financial Partners UNDP, UNICEF, World Bank
4 Strategic Partners KSNDMC, BSDMA, GSDMA, CSR
5 Networking Partners Inter-Agency Group
6 Technical Partners IIPH, IIT, IITM, INCOIS, IMD, BMTPC
7 Coordination Partners Inter-Agency Group, UNDP, UNICEF, WB
8 Research Partners TISS, RMSI, DCS, TARU
8.2 Media Management /Partnership: Protocol
The present day media can most effectively be used to disseminate the
information during all stages of disaster. Disaster cannot be managed by one and
needs involvement of various bodies working for the society. The media is a
strong link between States/Centre /Countries and whole of the World to bring in
the desired involvement of various stakeholders. If the media has to discharge its
role it is necessary to work in co-ordination with the Government & Non –
Government Agencies. The Disaster management needs a permanent structure to
mobilize resources and for that media, naturally becomes a sharp tool. The media
is not only powerful, it has the inner reach to the lowermost tier and the topmost
tier. The media should not only play an important role in publicity during
disasters but also actively participate in the disaster management process.
Role of Media:
The role of media involves the following stages and activities:-
Pre disaster:
 Awareness and information to people.
 Promotion of training aspects.
 Planning and encourage people to face the situation.
 Removing fear of unknown & of all false perceptions.

 Building partnerships between media and other organizations.
During disaster:
 Announcements of the disaster and the preventive measures.
 Broadcast for the assistance of the Medical, Police, Civil Defence and
food, water, medicines & other materials of immediate need.
 Media organizations take lead in broadcasting damage assessment &
details of measures being taken towards relief and rehabilitation.
 Establishing contacts, informing and assuring the affected ones of the
assistance and the measures of relief.
 Appeal for help to the masses for the victims in cash and services.
Post Disaster
 Monitoring re-settlement.
 Mobilizing technical and material aid in reconstruction.
 Providing financial aid, arrest panic and provide the true picture.
 Mobilization of State, National and International resources.
Role of Print Media
It has been our past experience that Government Organizations, NGOs, District
Authorities feel helpless, as disaster snaps away the communication. During this
period, it has been noticed that the Print Media and the Electronic Media becomes
most helpful. Newspaper is accessible to each and every corner of the country.
News big or even small is published in the newspaper. This automatically spreads
to the remotest village through a word of mouth. The credibility of the print media
can play a big role in disaster management and preparedness. The print media
have rather a qualitative role to play in preparing the community and other
stakeholders for better management of disaster.
Role of Electronic Media
Electronic Media can play an important role in dissemination of warning to the
public prior to disasters. A continuous contact and cooperation is to be maintained
with the national and local TV and radio stations by the Authorities. Activities for
effective role of electronic media during a time of disasters are as follows.

 Active involvement of professionals and specialists in these broadcasts is
recommended.
 On TV screen, scrolling script could give warning messages and even
briefly interrupt programmes for urgent cases.
 TVs could use sophisticated images, graphics like radar and satellite
images, GIS maps, etc.
 Also, live interviews and panel discussions can be arranged.
 Internet, SMS via mobile phones, etc., should be actively employed.
 Dedicated sites could be launched and information could be provided with
graphics, detailed measures, and response events.
8.3 Media Management
Objective
 To provide factual information to public with respect to the latest
development regarding disaster or any threatening situation.
 To provide specific information to relatives/dependents of dead and
injured persons.
 To create a constructive public opinion.
 To create a healthy relationship with the press and electronic media.
8.3.1 Duties of Administration & Nodal Department
 Administration, Nodal Department concerned and its team will collect
information available and release it to the media at the earliest.
 The information shall include telephone numbers of Helpline/ Enquiry
Booths. Photographers with digital and video cameras should also be
taken to the site of disaster.
 Duty Officer / Public Relation Officers should be deputed during night
shift for interacting with the media, if necessary.
 Duty Officer / PRO will organize press briefings at fixed timings.

 Emergency Control Room shall monitor various important media channels
to keep track of media reporting. Suitable corrections/clarifications may
also be issued, if required.
8.3.2 Spokesperson/Press Briefing/Authorized person
Only concerned Minister/Secretary of the Department at the State level and
District Collector at the District level are competent to interact with press and
electronic media. Apart from the above, any other officer authorized by the
Competent Authority is allowed to interact or give interview to the press and
electronic media. These persons should ensure that only factually correct and
confirmed information is shared with the media. No exaggerated version of any
event should be relayed to the media. Nobody should express or voice any
criticism, or express his personal opinion or views about the occurrence of
disaster, at any point of time.
8.3.3 Information to be relayed to Press and Electronic Media
Information to be given to media can be broadly segregated in to following
categories:
A) Occurrence of Disaster
 Date, time & exact location
 Prime cause of the occurrence will be relayed to media only with the
approval of competent authority.
 Extent of damage & loss.
 Regular reports regarding progress of Rescue and Relief work.
 Expected date and time of restoration.
B) Injured persons
 Steps taken by Administration to render immediate medical help.
 Number of persons rescued/injured persons under treatment in different
hospitals.
 Name of the hospitals where injured are being treated.
 Approximately number of patients that have been admitted in different
hospitals.

 Names of injured persons.
 Communication facilities like cell phones, STD phones provided at these
hospitals.
 Payment of ex-gratia.
 Facilities offered to relatives/dependents of victims.
C) Helpline Enquiry Booths & Control Room
 Setting up of Helpline Enquiry Booths
 Details of Helpline Enquiry Booths & Control Room:
 Places where these have been opened.
 Telephone & Fax Nos.
 State Control Room
 District Control Room
D) Casualty figures
 There is always a difference between casualty figures given by the
administration and casualty figures given by the media.
 During press briefings, latest figures on recovery of dead bodies should be
shared with media & likely rise in the toll considering the ground realities.
 Number of dead bodies recovered and number of bodies identified.
E) Press/Media briefings at disaster site
 Authorized officer shall collect factual information from the site and relay
the same to the media and State Headquarters. Thus a regular
communication channel will be established to keep media informed of all
the important details.
 PRO should be available during press briefings in HQ.
 There should be a fixed time for press briefings so that there is no
confusion regarding different versions given to separate channels at
various points of time.
 Simultaneous press briefings should be held at disaster site, at District
Headquarter and at the State level, as per the time intimated, so that the
same version is given by all concerned.

 The information release to various media are as follows:
• TV Channels
• News Agencies
• Print Media
 Convenience of media shall be taken care of by PR personnel with
assistance of representatives of administration at site.
 Tour of media persons should be conducted to hospital where injured are
being treated.
8.4 Media Cell
Media Cell is a body responsible for collating and disseminating content and
implications of significant research and development output on disaster
management by the Government to the general public through various media
outlets.
8.4.1 The Need
The research and developmental activities do not have periodic and professionally
written releases to the general public. With faculty and research scholars engaged
in deep research and its communication to journals or conferences in narrow areas
(albeit of high impact in that area), only a very few find the time and patience to
write an article intelligible to a general audience. On the other hand many are
more willing to talk about their research, in general seminars or when
interviewed. The Media Cell is an initiative to actively seek and create popular
press /media releases to the public & reaching to the public about the
developments in the field of disaster management.
8.4.2 Benefits of the Cell
1. Public dissemination of output (How well public funded programs benefit
the society).
2. High visibility of the research group and the work in the NIC & State
Portal and in popular social media.

8.4.3 How to Submit Articles
1. Research articles to be published every month.
2. Faculty and Students have to notify recent and high impact research or
developmental work to osdma@osdma.org. A brief note of why it is
considered high impact is essential as this will benefit the Media Cell in
understanding the significance and to prioritise interviews.
3. Media Cell will conduct an interview and create a draft article and
appropriate graphic, which will be reviewed by the research group for
factual accuracy.
4. The article will be finally reviewed for style and presentation by a
professional journalist/editor, before publishing it publicly.
8.4.4 Constitution of the Cell
The Media Cell consists of Editors, Graphic Designers and Writers. In the initial
learning phase of the cell, all the articles will also be reviewed by a professional
journalist/editor acting as a Consulting Editor, who will advise on the art of
writing well to better connect with the audience. Apart from this there are two
faculty advisors to provide broad guidelines and to liaison with I & PR
department. The PRO will also help in disseminating the articles through print,
electronics & social media outlets.
8.4 Lessons Learnt – “Super Cyclone” & Best Practices of
“Phailin”
Lesson learnt is a practice which needs to be documented indicating the
processes undertaken in carrying out certain activities. This documentation
will be a guide in managing such activities in future & can be replicated.
Odisha being a pioneer player in the field of Disaster Management has learnt
a lot from its past experiences while Managing Disasters like Super cyclone
of 1999 & Very Severe Cyclonic Storm - Phailin of 2013.

The practices undertaken in managing Super Cyclone of 1999 has not been
documented which could have been a guiding document during management
of Phailin-2013. However, after successful management of Phailin in the year
2013, the process of managing the disaster was documented under the title
“Managing Phailin 2013”. The document will be useful in handling similar
disasters in the future within or outside the State. Documentation of
successful management of such unseen emergencies will surely change the
disaster management scenario in the State.
**********

Chapter- IX
Financial Arrangement
Disaster management at the State level is mostly supported by the State Disaster
Response Fund. Funds from other sources like State Budget, Chief Minister’s
Relief Fund, External Assistance and loans from International Development
Agencies like World Bank etc. are also used for disaster management.
9.1 National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF)
The National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) has been constituted by the
Government of India as per the sub-section (1) of section (46) of Disaster
Management Act, 2005 and recommendation of the 13th Finance Commission.
NDRF has been constituted by replacing the National Calamity Contingency Fund
(NCCF).It is administered by the National Executive Committee (NEC).
In the event of a calamity of a severe nature when the State Disaster Response
Fund (SDRF) is insufficient to meet the relief requirements, additional central
assistance is provided from NDRF, after following the laid down procedure. The
State Government is required to submit a memorandum indicating the sector-wise
damage and requirement of funds. On receipt of memorandum from the State,
 An Inter-Ministerial Central Team is constituted and deputed for an on
the spot assessment of damage and requirement of funds for relief
operations, as per the extant items ad norms.
 The report of the Central Team is considered by the Inter-Ministerial
Group (IMG) / A Sub-Committee of the NEC (SC-NEC) constituted
under section 8 of DM Act, 2005 headed by the Home Secretary.
 Thereafter, the High Level Committee (HLC) comprising of the
Finance Minister, the Agriculture Minister, the Home Minister and the
Vice Chairman, NITI Ayog considers the request of the State
Government based on the report of the Central Team &
recommendation of the IMG/SC-NEC thereon, extant norms of
assistance and approves the quantum of assistance form NDRF.

 This is, however, subject to the adjustment of 50% of the balance in
SDRF as on 31st Mar of the preceding financial year.
 As per the 14th finance commission, the contribution of GoI towards
the corpus of SDRF in Odisha for a period from 2015-20 is Rs.4130
crore under the existing central & state share of 75:25.
9.2 State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF)
As per the provisions of Disaster Management Act, 2005 sub-section (1)(a) of
Section (48) and based on the recommendation of the 13th Finance Commission,
the Government of Odisha has constituted the State Disaster Response Fund
(SDRF) replacing the Calamity Relief Fund (CRF). The Central Government
contributes 75% of the said fund. The balance 25% matching share of contribution
is given by the State Government. The share of the Central Government in SDRF
is released to the State in 2 installments in June and December respectively in
each financial year. Likewise, the State Government transfers its contribution of
25% to the SDRF in two installments in June and December of the same year.
The annual allocation towards the corpus of SDRF in Odisha, for an amount of
Rs.4130 crore, under the existing central & state share of 75:25 for a period from
2015-20, as per the 14th finance commission, is detailed as below.

 SDRF - 2015-20 (Table No 9.1) (INR in Crore)
Share 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 Total
Central (75%) 560.25 588.75 618.00 648.75 681.75 3097.50
State (25%) 186.75 196.25 206.00 216.25 227.25 1032.50
TOTAL 747.00 785.00 824.00 865.00 909.00 4130.00
Ministry of Home Affairs, upon being satisfied that exigencies of a particular
calamity so warrant, may recommend an earlier release of the Central share up to
25% of the funds due to the State in the following year. This release will be
adjusted against the installments of the subsequent year.

 The State Executive Committee (SEC) headed by the Chief Secretary decides
on all matters connected with the financing of the relief expenditure of immediate
nature from SDRF.
9.2.1. SDRF Norms
a. Calamities covered under SDRF
(i) As per the Guidelines on Constitution and Administration of the State
Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) laid down by the Ministry of Home
Affairs, Government of India, SDRF funds shall be utilized for providing
immediate relief to the victims of cyclone, drought, earthquake, fire, flood,
tsunami, hailstorm, landslide, avalanche, cloud burst, pest attack, frost &
cold wave.
(ii) However, 10% of available SDRF funds may be utilised for providing
relief to the victims of the State Specific Disasters viz. lightning, heat
wave, whirl wind, tornado, heavy rain, boat accident (other than during
flood), drowning (other than during flood) & snake bite (other than during
flood).
(iii)The scale of relief assistance against each items for all disaster including
“local disasters” should not exceed the norms SDRF/NDRF. Any amount
spent by the State authorities over & above the ceiling amount would be
borne by the state Govt. out of its resources of the State Govt. & not from
SDRF.
(iv)The ex-gratia as prescribed under the SDRF norms is detailed below
LIST OF ITEMS & NORMS OF ASSISTANCE FROM SDRF/NDRF (Table 9.3)
Sl.
No ITEMs NORMS OF ASSISTANCE
1 GRATUITOUS RELIEF

a) Ex-Gratia payment to families
of deceased persons
Rs. 4.00 lakh per deceased person including
those involved in relief operations or associated
in preparedness activities, subject to
certification regarding cause of death from
appropriate authority.
b) Ex-Gratia payment for loss of a
limb or eyes(s).
Rs. 59,100/- per person, when the disability is
between 40% and 60%.
Rs. 2.00 lakh/- per person, when the disability
is more than 60%.
Subject to certification by a doctor from a
hospital or dispensary of Government,
regarding extent and cause of disability.
c) Grievous injury requiring
hospitalization
Rs 12,700/- per person requiring
hospitalization for more than a week.
Rs. 4,300/- per person requiring hospitalization
for less than a week.
d) Clothing and utensils/household goods for families whose
houses have been washed
away/fully damaged/severely
inundated for more than two days
due to a natural calamity.
Rs. 1,800/- per family, for loss of clothing.
Rs. 2,000/- per family, for loss of
utensils/household goods.
e) Gratuitous relief for families
whose livelihood is seriously
affected
Rs. 60/- per adult and Rs. 45/- per child, not
housed in relief camps. State Govt. will certify
that identified beneficiaries are not housed in
relief camps. Further State Government will
provide the basis and process for arriving at
such beneficiaries district-wise.
Period for providing gratuitous relief will be as
per assessment of the State Executive
Committee (SEC) and the Central Team (in
case of NDRF). The default period of
assistance will up to 30 days, which may be
extended up to 60 days in the first instance, if
required, and subsequently up to 90 days in
case of drought/pest attack. Depending on the
ground situation, the State Executive
Committee can extend the time period beyond
the prescribed limit subject to that expenditure
on this account should not exceed 25% of
SDRF allocation for the year.
2. SEARCH & RESCUE OPERATIONS
(a) Cost of search and rescue As per actual cost incurred, assessed by SEC

measures/ evacuation of people
affected/ likely to be affected.
and recommended by central Team(in case of
NDRF).
- By the time the central Team visits the
affected area, these activities are already over.
Therefore, the State Level Committee and the
Central Team can recommend actual / nearactual costs.
(b) Hiring of boats for carrying
immediate relief and saving lives.
As per actual costs incurred, assessed by SEC
and recommended by the Central Team (in case
of NDRF).
The quantum of assistance will be limited to
the actual expenditure incurred on hiring boats
and essential equipment requiring for rescuing
stranded people and thereby saving human
lives during a notified natural calamity.
3 RELIEF MEASURES
a) Provision for temporary
accommodation, food, clothing,
medical care etc. for people
affected/ evacuated and sheltered
in relief camps.
As per assessment of need by SEC and
recommended of the Central Team (in case of
NDRF), for a period of up to 30 days. The SEC
would need to specify the number of camps,
their duration and the number of persons in
camps. In case of continuation of a calamity
like drought or widespread devastation caused
by earthquake or flood etc., this period may be
extended to 60 days, and up to 90 days in case
of severe drought. Depending on the ground
situation, the State Executive Committee can
extend the time period beyond the prescribed
limit subject to that expenditure on this account
should not exceed 25% of SDRF allocation for
the year.
Medical care may be provided from National
Rural Health Mission (NRHM).
b) Air dropping of essential
supplies
As per actual, based on assessment of need by
SEC and recommendation of the Central Team
(in case of NDRF).
- The quantum of assistance will be limited to
actual amount raised in the bills by the Ministry
of Defence for airdropping of essential supplies
and rescue operations only.
c) Provision of emergency supply
of drinking water in rural areas and
As per actual cost, based on the assessment of
need by NEC and recommended by the Central

urban areas. Team ( in case of NDRF), up to 30 days and
may be extended up to 90 days in case of
drought. Depending on the ground situation,
the State Executive Committee can extend the
time period beyond the prescribed limit subject
to that expenditure on this account should not
exceed 25% of SDRF allocation for the year.
4 CLEARANCE OF AFFECTED AREAS
a) Clearance of debris in public
areas.
As per actual cost within 30 days from the date
of start of the work based on assessment of
need by SEC for the assistance to be provided
under SDRF and as per assessment of the
Central Team for assistance to be provided
under NDRF.
b) Drainage of flood water in
affected areas
As per actual cost within 30 days from the date
of start of the work based on assessment of
need by SEC for the assistance to be provided
under SDRF and as per assessment of the
Central Team(in case of NDRF).
c) Disposal of dead bodies/
Carcasses
As per actuals, based on assessment of need by
SEC and recommendation of the Central Team
(in case of NDRF).
5 AGRICULTURE
(i) Assistance to farmers having landholding up to 2 ha.
 A. Assistance for land and other loss
a) De-silting of agriculture land (
where thickness of sand/ silt
deposit is more than 3", to be
certified by the competent
authority of the State Government
)
Rs. 12,200/- per hectare for each item.
(Subject to the condition that no other
assistance/subsidy has been availed of by/is
eligible to the beneficiary under any other
Government Scheme.)
b) Removal of debris on
agriculture land in hilly areas.
c) De-silting/ Restoration/ Repair
of fish farms
d) Loss of substantial portion of
land caused by landslide,
avalanche, change of course of
rivers.
Rs. 37,500/- per hectare to only those small and
marginal farmers whose ownership of the land
is legitimate as per the revenue records.
 B. Input subsidy (where crop loss is
33% and above)
a) For agriculture crops,
horticulture crops and annual
plantation crops
Rs 6,800/- per hectare in rainfed areas and
restricted to sown areas.
Rs. 13,500/- per hectare in assured irrigated

areas, subject to minimum assistance not less
Rs.1000/- and restricted to sown areas.
b) Perennial Crops
Rs. 18,000/- hectare for all types of perennial
crops subject to minimum assistance not less
than Rs. 2000/- and restricted to sown areas.
c) Sericulture
Rs. 4,800/- per hectare for Eri, Mulberry,
Tussar
Rs. 6,000/- per hectare for Muga.
(ii) Input Subsidy to farmers having
more than 2 Ha of landholding
Rs. 6,800/- per hectare in rain fed areas and
restricted to sown areas.
Rs. 13,500/- per hectare for areas under assured
irrigation and restricted to sown areas.
Rs. 18,000/- per hectare for all types of
perennial crops and restricted to sown areas.
- Assistance may be provided where crop loss
is 33% and above, subject to a ceiling of 2
hectare per farmer.
6. ANIMAL HUSBANDRY - ASSISTANCE TO SMALL AND MARGINAL
FARMERS
i) Replacement of milch animals,
draught animals or animals used
for haulage.
Milch animals -
Rs. 30,000/- Buffalo/cow/camel/yak/Mithun
etc.
Rs. 3,000/- Sheep/goat/pig.
Draught animal -
Rs. 25,000/- Camel/horse/bullock etc.
Rs. 16,000/- Calf/Donkey/Pony/Mule
- The assistance may be restricted for the
actual loss of economically productive animals
and will be subject to a ceiling of 3 large milch
animal or 30 small milch animals or 3 large
draught animal or 6 small drought animals per
household irrespective of whether a household
has lost a large number of animals. (The loss is
to be certified by the Competent Authority
designated by the State Government).
Poultry:-
Poultry @ Rs. 50/- per bird subject to a ceiling
of assistance of Rs. 5000/- per beneficiary
household. The death of the poultry birds
should be on account of natural calamity.

Note:- Relief under these norms is not eligible
if the assistance is available from any other
Government Scheme. e.g. loss of birds due to
Avian Influenza or any other diseases for
which the Department of Animal Husbandry
has a separate scheme for compensating the
poultry owners.

(ii) Provision of fodder/ feed
concentrate including water supply
and medicines in cattle camps.
Large animals - Rs. 70/- per day.
Small animals - Rs. 35/- per day.
Period for providing relief will be as per
assessment of the State Executive Committee
(SEC) and the Central Team (in case of
NDRF). The default period for assistance will
be upto 30 days, which may be extended upto
60 days in the first instance and in case of
severe drought up to 90 days. Depending on the
ground situation, the State Executive
Committee can extend the time period beyond
the prescribed limit, subject to the stipulation
that expenditure on this account should not
exceed 25% of SDRF allocation for the year.
Based on assessment of need by SEC and
recommendation of the Central Team (in case
of NDRF) consistent with estimates of cattle as
per Livestock Census and subject to the
certificate by the competent authority about the
requirement of medicine and vaccine being
calamity related.
iii) Transport of fodder to cattle
outside cattle camps
As per the actual cost of transport, based on
assessment of need by SEC and
recommendation of the Central Team (in case
of NDRF) consistent with estimates of cattle as
per Livestock Census.
 7. FISHERY
i) Assistance to Fisherman for
repair/ replacement of boats, nets -
damaged or lost
 --Boat
 --Dugout-Canoe
 --Catamaran
 --Net
(This assistance will not be
provided if the beneficiary is
Rs. 4,100/- for repair of partially damaged
boats only
Rs. 2,100/- for repair of partially damaged net.
Rs. 9,600/- for repair of fully damaged boats.
Rs. 2,600/- for repair of fully damaged net.

eligible or has availed of any
subsidy/assistance, for the instant
calamity, under any other
Government Scheme.)
ii) Input subsidy for fish seed
farm
Rs. 8,200/- per hectare.
(This assistance will not be provided if the
beneficiary is eligible or has availed of any
subsidy/assistance, for the instant calamity,
under any other Government Scheme, except
the one time subsidy provided under the
Scheme of Department of Animal husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries, Ministry of
Agriculture.)
 8. HANDICRAFTS/HANDLOOM - ASSISTANCE TO ARTISANS
i) For replacement of damaged
tools/ equipment
Rs. 4,100/- per artisan for equipments.
- Subject to certification by the competent
authority designated by the Government about
damage and its replacement.
ii) For loss of raw-materials/
goods in process/ finished goods.
Rs. 4,100/- per artisan for raw material.
- Subject to certification by the competent
authority designated by the State Government
about loss and its replacement.
9. HOUSING
a) Fully damaged/ destroyed
houses
 i) Pucca house Rs. 95,100/- per house, in plain areas
Rs. 1,01,900/- per house, in hilly areas
including Integrated Action Plan (IAP)
districts.
 ii) Kutcha house
b) Severely damaged houses
 i) Pucca house
 ii) Kutcha house
c) Partially Damaged Houses
 i) Pucca (other than huts) where
the damage is at least 15% Rs.5,200/- per house
 ii) Kutcha (other than huts)
where the damage is at least 15% Rs.3,200/- per house.
d) Damaged/destroyed huts:
Rs. 4,100/- per hut
(Hut means temporary, make shift unit, inferior
to Kutcha house, made of thatch, mud, plastic
sheets etc. traditionally recognized as huts by
the State/District authorities.)
Note:- The damaged house should be an

authorized construction duly certified by the
Competent Authority of the State Government.
e) Cattle shed attached with
house Rs. 2,100/- per shed.
10. INFRASTRUCTURE
Repair/restoration (of immediate
nature) of damaged
infrastructure.
(1) Roads & bridges,(2) Drinking
water Supply works, (3) Irrigation,
(4) Power (only limited to
immediate restoration of
electricity supply in the affected
areas), (5) Schools, (6) Primary
Health Centre, (7) Community
assets owned by Panchayat.
Sectors such as
Telecommunication and Power
(except immediate restoration of
power supply), which generate
their own revenue, and also
undertake immediate
repair/restoration works from their
own funds/resources are excluded.
Activities of immediate nature:
Illustrative lists of activities which may be
considered as works of an immediate nature are
given in the Section-B.
Assessment of requirements:
Based on assessment of need, as per States'
costs/rates/ schedules for repair, by SEC and
recommendation of the Central Team (in case
of NDRF).
- As regards repair of roads, due consideration
shall be given to Norms for Maintenance of
Roads in India, 2001, as amended from time to
time, for repair of roads affected by heavy
rains/floods, cyclone, landslide, sand dunes,
etc. to restore traffic. For reference these norms
are
* Normal and Urban areas: up to 15% of the
total of Ordinary Repair(OR) and Periodical
Repair (PR).
* Hills: up to 20% of total of OR and PR.
- In case of repair of roads, assistance will be
given based on the notified Ordinary Repair
(OR) and Periodical Renewal (PR) of the State.
In case OR & PR rate is not available, then
assistance will be provided @ Rs.1 lakh/km for
State Highway and Major District Road and @
Rs.0.60 lakh/km for rural roads. The condition
of "State shall first use its provision under the
budget for regular maintenance and repair" will
no longer be required, in view of the
difficulties in monitoring such stipulation,
though it is a desirable goal for all the States.
- In case of repairs of Bridges and Irrigation
works, assistance will be given as per the
schedule of rates notified by the concerned

States. Assistance for micro irrigation scheme
will be provided @ Rs.1.5 lakh per damaged
scheme. Assistance for restoration of damaged
medium and large irrigation projects will also
be given for the embankment portions, on par
with the case of similar rural roads, subject to
the stipulation that no duplication would be
done with any ongoing schemes.
- Regarding repairs of damaged drinking water
schemes, the eligible damaged drinking water
structures will be eligible for assistance @
Rs.1.5 lakh/damaged structure.
- Regarding repair of damaged primary and
secondary schools, primary health centres,
Anganwadi and community assets owned by
the Panchayats, assistance will be given @
Rs.2 lakh/damaged structure.
- Regarding repair of damaged power sector,
assistance will be given to damaged
conductors, poles and transformers upto the
level of 11 kV. The rate of assistance will be @
Rs.4000/poles, Rs.0.50 lakh per km of
damaged conductor and Rs.1.00 lakh per
damaged distribution tansformer.
11. PROCUREMENT
Procurement of essential search,
rescue and evacuation equipments
including communication
equipments, etc. for response to
disaster.
- Expenditure is to be incurred from SDRF
only
(and not from NDRF), as assessed by the State
Executive Committee (SEC).
- The total expenditure on this item should not
exceed 10% of the annual allocation of the
SDRF.
12. CAPACITY BUILDING - Expenditure is to be incurred from SDRF only
(and not from NDRF), as assessed by the State
Executive Committee (SEC).
- The total expenditure on this item should not
exceed 5% of the annual allocation of the
SDRF.
13. State specific disasters within the
local context in the State, which
are not included in the notified list
of disasters eligible for assistance
- Expenditure is to be incurred from SDRF only
(and not from NDRF), as assessed by the State
Executive Committee (SEC).

from SDRF/NDRF, can be met
from SDRF within the limit of
10% of the annual funds allocation
of the SDRF.
- The norm for various items will be the same
as applicable to other notified natural disasters,
as listed above. or
- In these cases, the scale of relief assistance
against each item for 'local disaster' should not
exceed the norms of SDRF.
- The flexibility is to be applicable only after
the State has formally listed the disasters for
inclusion and notified transparent norms and
guidelines with a clear procedure for
identification of the beneficiaries for disaster
relief for such local disasters', with the
approval of SEC.
SECTION-B
Illustrative list of activities identified as of an immediate nature
1. Drinking Water Supply:
i. Repair of damaged platforms of hand pumps/ring wells/spring-tapped
chambers/public stand posts, cisterns.
ii. Restoration of damaged stand posts including replacement of damaged pipe
lengths with new pipe lengths, cleaning of clear water reservoir (to make it
leak proof).
iii. Repair of damaged pumping machines, leaking overhead reservoirs and water
pumps including damaged intake - structure, approach gantries/jetties.
2. Roads:
i. Filling up of breaches and potholes, use of pipe for creating waterways, repair
and stone pitching of embankments.
ii. Repair of breached culverts.
iii. Providing diversions to the damaged/washed out portions of bridges to restore
immediate connectivity.
iv. Temporary repair of approaches to bridges/embankments of bridges, repair of
damaged railing bridges, repair of causeways to restore immediate
connectivity, granular sub base, over damaged stretch of roads to restore
traffic.
3. Irrigation:
i. Immediate repair of damaged canal structures and earthen/masonry works of
tanks and small reservoirs with the use of cement, sand bags and stones.
ii. Repair of weak areas as piping or rat holes in dam walls/embankments.
iii. Removal of vegetative material/building material/debris from canal and
drainage system.
iv. Repair of embankments of minor, medium and major irrigation projects.
4. Health
i. Repair of damaged approach roads, buildings and electrical lines of

PHCs/community Health Centres.
5. Community assets of Panchayat
a) Repair of village internal roads.
b) Removal of debris from drainage/sewerage lines.
c) Repair of internal water supply lines.
d) Repair of street lights.
e) Temporary repair of primary schools, Panchayat ghars, community halls,
anganwadi, etc.
6. Power
a) Poles/Conductors and transformers upto 11 kv.
7. The assistance will be considered as per the merit towards the following activities:
i) Damaged primary school building
Higher secondary/middle/ college
and other educational institutions
building
Up to Rs. 1.50 lakh/unit
Not covered
ii) Primary Health Centre Upto Rs. 1.50 lakh/unit
iii) Electric poles and wires etc. Normative cost (upto Rs.4000 per pole and
Rs.0.50 lakh per km)
iv)
Panchayat Ghar/Anganwadi/
Mahila Mondal/ Yuva Kendra/
Community Hall
Upto 2.00 lakh/unit
v) State Highways/Major District
road Rs.1.00 lakh/km*
vi) Rural road/bridge Rs.0.60 lakh/km*
vii) Drinking water scheme Upto 1.50 lakh/unit
viii)
Irrigation Sector:
Minor Irrigation schemes/Canal
Major irrigation scheme
Flood control and anti Erosion
Protection work
upto Rs.1.50 lakh/scheme
Not Covered
Not Covered
ix)
Hydro Power Project/HT
Distribution systems/
Transformers and subs stations
Not Covered
x) High Tension Lines (above 11 kv) Not Covered

xi)
State Govt Buildings viz.
departmental/office building,
departmental/residential quarters,
religious structures, patwarkhana,
Court premises, play ground,
forest bungalow property and
animal/bird sanctuary etc.
Not Covered.
xii) Long terms/Permanent Restoration
Work incentive Not Covered
xiii) Any new work of long term nature Not Covered
xiv) Distribution of commodities
Not Covered
(However, there is a provision for assistance as
GR to families in dire need of assistance after a
disasters)
xv)
Procurement of
equipments/machineries under
NDRF
Not Covered
xvi) National Highways
Not Covered
(Since GOI born entire expenditure towards
restoration work activities)
xvii) Fodder seed to augment fodder
production Not Covered
 - If OR & PR rates are not provided by the State
9.2.4 Functions of State Executive Committee regarding affairs of
SDRF
(i) The SEC will decide on all matters concerned with the financing of the
relief expenditure of immediate nature from SDRF. SEC can extend the
relief assistance period within a limit expenditure not exceeding 25% of
SDRF allocation for the year.
(ii) SEC will arrange contribution from concerned Govt, & invest the
accretions to SDRF in accordance to the following norms approved by
GoI.
i. Central Govt. dated securities
ii. Auctioned Treasury bills
iii. Interest earning deposits & certificates of deposit with
Scheduled commercial Banks.

(iii)Five per cent (5%) of the annual allocation may be kept for Capacity
building activities like.
i. Setting up of & strengthening Emergency Operation Centres
ii. Training & capacity building of stakeholders & functionaries in
the State.
iii. Supporting Disaster Management centres in ATIs & other
institutions in the State.
iv. Preparation of Disaster Management plans based on Hazard
Risk & Vulnerability analysis.
9.3 Chief Minister’s Relief Fund (CMRF)
Odisha Chief Minister's Relief Fund aims to provide assistance to calamities and
in distress condition, to indigent persons suffering from critical ailments and to
undertake charitable activities for public welfare. A guideline in this regard has
also been devised in the year 2017. Cases Eligible for Assistance under CMRF
 Poor and persons in distress: Relief to the poor, including grant and aid
(financial or otherwise) to persons in distress.
 Aged, differently able, orphans, AIDS affected: Assistance for the relief
and rehabilitation of the aged, differently able' orphans, HIV/AIDS
affected persons/families and those otherwise differently able or incapable
of earning their livelihood, by grant and aid (financial and otherwise) and /
or maintenance, establishment and support of institutions and homes for
the benefit of such persons.
 NOKs of person dying due to calamities, or violence: Exgratia/compensation to the NOKs of the person dying due to the natural or
man-made calamities, communal violence, naxal violence, or public
disorder of a serious nature or any other calamity, affecting a family or a
community, which deserves extreme compassion & not covered under
existing assistance sheme of State/Central Government.
 Persons affected by calamities or violence: Assistance for relief &
rehabilitation of persons affected by natural or man-made calamities,
communal violence', naxal violence or public disorder of a serious nature
or any other calamity' affecting a family or a community, which deserves

extreme compassion and not covered under any existing assistance scheme
of State/central Government.
 Medical treatment & aid: Assistance out of CMRF may be provided to
indigent & poor deserving persons who could not avail assistance for their
treatment under Odisha State Treatment Fund (OSTF) due to various
reason. The medical aid also extended to Freedom Fighter pensioners &
remote areas through Collectors.
 Assistance for Rural Development: Financial assistance out of CMRF
may also be considered to undertake, promote, aid or otherwise support
rural development including any programme for promoting the social and
economic welfare of the public in any rural area either directly or through
an independent agency following due procedure.
 Delegation of Power to the Collectors: To assist more number of
deserving person and for better utilisation of the Chief Minister’s Relief
Fund, the State Government have delegated powers to the Collectors for
sanction of assistance out of CMRF so as to extend such assistance to the
deserving persons immediately at the time of their need.
9.4 Release of Funds to Departments and Districts:
Funds required towards pure relief to affected persons / families for natural
calamities in shape of emergency assistance, organizing relief camp / free kitchen
/ cattle camp, agriculture input subsidy and other assistances to affected farmers,
ex-gratia as assistance for death cases, grievous injury, house building assistance,
assistance to fisherman / fish seed farmers / sericulture farmers, assistance for
repair / restoration of dwelling houses damaged due to natural calamities are
administered through the respective Collectors.
Part funds towards repair / restoration of immediate nature of the damaged
public infrastructure are released to the Departments concerned. On receipt of
requisition from the Collectors / Departments concerned, funds are released after
obtaining approval / sanction of SEC. However, funds towards pure relief are
released under orders of Special Relief Commissioner / Chief Secretary and the
same is placed before the State Executive Committee in its next meeting for
approval. To save time, Collectors have been instructed to disburse the ex-gratia

assistance from the available cash and record the same on receipt of fund from
Special Relief Commissioner.
9.5 Damage Assessments and Report after Flood/Cyclone
Private properties and properties of Government under different Departments are
damaged by high floods and cyclones. As per para-75 of Orissa Relief Code, the
Collector shall undertake assessment of damages to private properties as well as
properties of Government. This assessment shall be done quickly soon after the
abatement of flood/cyclone in the formats prescribed in Appendix- X of Orissa
Relief Code.
9.5.1 Submission of preliminary damage report (Para-76 of ORC)
1. The Collector as well as the district level officers under each
Department of Government shall, immediately after assessment of
flood damage, forward a copy of their report to their Head of
Department. The district level officers may also submit reports to the
Collector.
2. The Heads of Departments after necessary scrutiny shall forward their
reports to their respective Departments of Government with copy to
Special Relief Commissioner, not later than two weeks from the date
of abatement of flood.
3. The Special Relief Commissioner shall compile the State report and
shall furnish the consolidated preliminary report to the Revenue
Department within a week of the receipt of the reports from the Heads
of Department.
4. The preliminary flood damage report should be prepared as accurately
as possible, as the relief measures, if any, are to be based on the merit
and statistical data of that report.
9.5.2 Submission of final flood/cyclone damage report (Para77 of ORC)
 The concerned Heads of Departments as well as the Collector shall
take immediate steps to compile the final report on flood/cyclone

damage in the formats prescribed in Appendix- X of the ORC soon
after submission of the preliminary report.
 Accidental errors, clerical mistakes, shortcomings, if any, noticed
should be rectified in the final report. The final report shall be made
available to Special Relief Commissioner as soon as possible and not
later than one month from the date of abatement of flood.
 On receipt of the reports from the different sources, Special Relief
Commissioner shall forthwith compile the state report and furnish the
same to the Revenue Department.
9.6 Central and State Government programmes and
Schemes on Natural Calamities
Mainstreaming Disaster Management in development planning is the most critical
component to mitigate disaster risks. That’s why it’s important to make note of
financial resources which are used in the implementation of such programmes and
schemes which can lessen the risk from disasters by reducing vulnerability. It is
also crucial to build communities’ resilience to deal with them. Moreover, as
mandated by Ministry of Finance & Ministry of Home Affairs on
recommendations of NITI Aayog vide OM No. O-11013/02/2015-CSS & CMC
dated 17th August 2016 within the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) to be
utilised, inter alia for mitigation / restoration activities in the event of natural
calamities, or to satisfy local requirements in areas affected by internal security
disturbances in the sector covered by CSS. Thus, relevant Central Government
and State Government funded schemes are identified which are crucial to build
over resilience of communities in the context of the district.
9.7 Fund provision for disaster preparedness & capacity
building
The capacity building for disaster Management in the state is categorised under
two broad heads viz.
 Strengthening State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA) &
District Disaster Management Authorities (DDMAs).
 Capacity building of the Odisha Disaster Response force (ODRAF) &
other response force & volunteers

The budget under SDRF for the preparedness & capacity building is detailed
in the below table.
Budget for preparedness & capacity building under SDRF (Table 9.5)
Sl
No.
Category Amount
(INR in Rs.)
1 Strengthening State Disaster Management
Authoritty (SDMA) & District Disaster
Management Authorities (DDMAs)
5,0,00,000
2 Capacity building of the Odisha Disaster
Rapid Action Force (ODRAF) & other
response forces & volunteers.
TOTAL

Chapter X
Implementation, Review and
Updating of the Plan
The provisions of the Disaster Management Act 2005 regarding implementation, review
and updating of the State Disaster Management Plan (SDMP) are as follows:
i. As per Section 22 (1) the State Executive Committee shall have the responsibility
for implementing the National Plan and State Plan and act as the coordinating
and monitoring body for management of disaster in the State.
ii. According to Section 23 (6) appropriate provisions shall be made by the State
Government for financing for the measures to be carried out under the State Plan.
iii. Section 23 (7) mandates that copies of the State Plan shall be made available to
the Departments of the Government of the State and such Departments shall draw
up their own plans in accordance with the State Plan.
iv. As per Section 30 (2) (ii) the District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA)
may coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National Policy, State
Policy, National Plan, State Plan and District Plan.
v. According Section 39 (d) it shall be the responsibility of every department of the
Government of a State to respond effectively and promptly to any threatening
disaster situation or disaster in accordance with the State Plan, and in accordance
with the guidelines or direction of the National Executive Committee and the
State Executive Committee.
vi. As per Section 23 (5) of the DM Act 2005 the State Disaster Management Plan
(SDMP) shall be reviewed and updated annually.
The District Disaster Management Plans (DDMPs), Disaster Management Plans of
Departments of the State Government and the State Disaster Management Plan (SDMP)
are to be updated annually as per the timeline given by State Disaster Management
Authority/ OSDMA.

Odisha State Disaster
Management Authority (OSDMA)

9th Floor, Rajiv Bhawan, Unit-5, Bhubaneswar-751015
Phone: 0674-2395398, 2395531, Fax- (0674) 2391871
E-mail: osdma@osdma.org, Website: www.osdma.org